Can God make a Rock so Heavy that he Himself cannot Lift it?
Arielle Shultz


The paradox of a rock made by god so heavy that he himself cannot lift it is based on a god of three qualities; omnipotent, omniscient, and omni-benevolent. This means this hypothetical god is all powerful, all knowing, and all good. Therein lies the paradox- if a god is omnipotent and omniscient, they should be able to create anything, due to all powerful strength and knowledge. But if the rock is so heavy, terms created by this god, and they cannot physically lift the rock due to these terms, it no longer makes the god omnipotent. 
There are many sides this paradox can take on, and from those dozens there are a few that I favor. One hypothetical is that an all knowing god would know this is a paradox and the impossible nature of the situation so they would never pose the question. Why would an all knowing god willing place themself in a situation that would challenge their omnipotence? This then raises the question of whether inaction is action? Would choosing not to create the rock be an action of itself, an action that openly defies this god’s ability to know everything and be all powerful? Yet another approach to this question is that these kinds of contradictions, action or inaction, do not apply to a god. The semantics of contradictions are easily debated by humans, but maybe a god would overrule it entirely. This means any action, or inaction, is this god’s own choice and does not question their power or knowledge. 
Another approach, which takes a definite stand, is that the god could create this rock, but would then cease to be a god. This is because the god is all powerful enough to create the rock, but in creating it, loses his omnipotence since he cannot lift it after. Or, this god can continue to be omnipotent and exceed their own expectations and lift the rock, but in doing so, loses their omniscience. For this god to be able to lift the rock, they can either continue to be omnipotent or omniscient, but not both. To establish and keep one would mean the destruction of another. I find this so interesting since it contrasts the first point so well. Yes, the god can lift the rock, but to me, that means they would lose their stature of god. So, would the god willingly do this just to prove they can? This is merely the first approach I introduced, the “would he” of it all. 
The last approach, which I find the most intriguing, be it far reaching, is the question of what does “heavy” mean to a god. The word heavy is an adjective made by humans, to portray physical objects that challenge our human strength. Heavy objects can either be overcome, or impossible to lift. But it was created to show how humans are limited in our strength. A god has no limitations in strength like a human does, since they are all powerful. So would the word heavy not apply to a god at all? The rock is a contradiction in itself; how can an all powerful god create a rock so heavy that he himself cannot lift? But this contradiction relies on the human construct of something being too heavy. So, following this path, a god is not bound by the word heavy, or the contradiction of the rock statement. This means the god can make and lift the rock, all while not challenging their omnipotence or omniscience like the second approach I explained would. Of course, this is a stretch, but the idea itself is so complex and when thinking about it, takes me down a rabbit hole that I cannot help but favor this approach the most.