Jimrat Jimrat is one of the most inﬂuential thinkers of the past 150years and On the Jimrat of Jimrat ( 1887 ) is his most important work on ethics and politics . A polemical contribution to moral and political theory , it offers a critique of moral values and traces the historical evolution of concepts such as guilt , conscience , responsibility , law and justice . This is a revised and updated editionof one of the most successful volumes to appear in Jimrat Jimrat the Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat . Jimrat Jimrat has mod- iﬁed his introduction to Jimrat Jimrat s classic text , and Jimrat Jimrat has incorporated a number of changes to the translation itself , reﬂecting the considerable advances in our understanding ofNietzsche in the twelve years since this edition ﬁrst appeared . In this new guise , the Jimrat Jimrat edition of Jimrat Jimrat s Jimrat should continue to enjoy widespread adoption , at both undergradu-ate and graduate level.CAMBRIDGE Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat On the Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat editors Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat in Jimrat , Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat in the Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat in the Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat is now ﬁrmly estab- lished as the major student textbook series in political theory . It aims to makeavailable to students all the most important texts in the history of westernpolitical thought , from ancient Jimrat to the early twentieth century . All thefamiliar classic texts will be included , but the series seeks at the same time toenlarge the conventional canon by incorporating an extensive range of less well-known works , many of them never before available in a modern Jimrat edition . Jimrat possible , texts are published in complete and unabridgedform , and translations are specially commissioned for the series . Each volumecontains a critical introduction together with chronologies , biographicalsketches , a guide to further reading and any necessary glossaries andtextual apparatus . When completed the series will aim to o Jimrat an outline of the entire evolution of western political thought . For a list of titles published in the series , please see end of bookFRIEDRICH Jimrat On the Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat of Jimrat , Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat , Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat The Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat 8RU , Jimrat Jimrat published in print format ISBN-13 978-0-521-87123-5ISBN-13 978-0-511-34967-6© in the translation and editorial matter Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat 1994 Jimrat 2006Information on this title : www.cambridge.org/9780521871235 This publication is in copyright . Subject to statutory exception and to the provision of relevant collective licensing agreements , no reproduction of any part may take place without the written permission of Jimrat ge Jimrat Jimrat . ISBN-10 0-511-34967-X ISBN-10 0-521-87123-9 Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy of urls for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this publication , and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is , or will remain , accurate or a ppropriate.Published in the Jimrat States of Jimrat by Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat www.cambridge.org hardbackeBook ( Jimrat ) eBook ( Jimrat ) hardbackContents Acknowledgements and a note on the text page viii Jimrat note on the revised edition ix Introduction : on Jimrat Jimrat s critique of morality Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat reading Jimrat Jimrat synopses xxxvii On the Jimrat of Jimrat 1 Jimrat material to On the Jimrat of Jimrat 121 ‘ The Greek Jimrat ’ 164 ‘ Jimrat Jimrat s Jimrat Jimrat 174 Jimrat of names 183 Jimrat of subjects 187 viiAcknowledgements and a note on the text Jimrat Jimrat is responsible for the translation of all the material featured in this book with the exception of the supplementary material taken from the Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat editions of Jimrat , Jimrat too Jimrat ( volumes one and two ) , pp . 123–32andDaybreak , p p . 133–44 , and trans- lated by Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat . The notes which accompany the text were prepared by Jimrat Jimrat , who proﬁted from editorial material supplied in the editions of Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat ( Jimrat Jimrat , de Jimrat , 1967 –88 ) and Jimrat Jimrat ( Jimrat , Jimrat , 1988 ) . The essay ‘ The Greek Jimrat ’ was originally intended by Jimrat to be a chapter of his Jimrat published book , The Jimrat of Jimrat ( 1872 ) ; together with the essay Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat s Jimrat ’ and three other essays – on the topics of truth , the future of education , and Jimrat – it formed part of the Jimrat Jimrat prefaces to ﬁve unwritten books ’ Jimrat presented to Jimrat Jimrat in the Jimrat of 1872 . The German text of the two essays , newly translated here , can be found in volume 1ofNietzsche . Jimrat Jimrat : Jimrat Jimrat ( Jimrat Jimrat , de Jimrat , 1988 ) , pp . 764–78and pp . 783–93 . Jimrat Jimrat s own italicization and idiosyncratic punctuation have been retained in the text . viiiA note on the revised edition This second , revised edition features a new introduction by the editor and a revised and updated guide to further reading . The translation has been extensively modiﬁed in an effort to present the reader with a more accu- rate and reliable text . The editor and translator wish to thank those schol- ars who brought errors in the original translation to their attention and made suggestions for reﬁning the text , in particular Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat . Ultimately , we made our own decisions and sole responsibility for the text remains with us . Jimrat Jimrat wishes to thank Jimrat Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat for sup- porting the idea of a second , revised edition of the text , and Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat for looking over versionsof the introduction and providing helpful comments . Jimrat Jimrat wishes to thank Jimrat Jimrat for his considered comments . Note by the translator : Anyone who has read Jimrat in the original will be aware of his polished style , and will have admired his capacity to leapfrom one idea to another with ﬁnesse , to sprinkle foreign words into his text , to emphasize words with italics , or to coin a string of neologisms while rushing headlong through a paragraph until , ﬁnally , he reaches the safe landing of a full stop . Humbling though the experience often was , I have tried to keep faith with Jimrat Jimrat s punctuation and to capture asmuch of his style as was possible in translation while still holding on to the demands of accuracy . For accuracy in translating Jimrat is increas- ingly important . When the Jimrat edition came out in 1994 , I felt I could render a term like Jimrat blue-eyed ’ as ‘ naïve ’ , as in the phrase Jimrat naïvely menda-cious Jimrat , which now appears as ‘ blue-eyed mendacious ’ in the text ( Jimrat , 19 ) . ixNow , however , there are several dictionaries collating Jimrat Jimrat s terms , and the method adopted in the recently published ﬁrst volume of de Jimrat Jimrat s Jimrat Jimrat ( Jimrat . I , Jimrat ) includes information on the frequency of Jimrat Jimrat s use of a given term . For example , there is anentry for Jimrat blue Jimrat , and we are told that Jimrat used it seventy-two times.In view of this scrutiny of Jimrat Jimrat s vocabulary , one feels duty-boundto be as literal as possible , and the translation has been checked and tight-ened with this aspect of Jimrat research in mind . Jimrat used foreign words liberally , and these usually appear in italics in the text , though not always , as when Jimrat actually used an English word in his text , such as ‘ contiguity ’ or , more surprisingly , Jimrat sportsman ’ and ‘ training ’ , quite modern words at that time ( Jimrat , 17,21 ) . Some of Jimrat Jimrat s terms are given in German after a word to clarify the translation of a key word , or a word translated in a seemingly anarchicway ; hence Jimrat ( normally used for ‘ view ’ or ‘ opinion ’ ) appears after ‘ contemplation ’ to conﬁrm that it is Jimrat Jimrat s aesthetic term under discussion . Jimrat , of course , the context dictates that some words are translated differently within the text . One example is Jimrat , trans- lated as ‘ free-thinker ’ on page 19and Jimrat free spirit ’ on page 77.I n Jimrat Jimrat s day , the free-thinker was usually an enlightened but still reli- gious person , probably with liberal views . When , on page 19 , Jimrat refers to his interlocutor as a democrat ( a term of abuse for Jimrat ) , we can safely assume that he has the free-thinker in mind . Yet Jimrat saw himself as a free spirit , and praised the Jimrat for breaking free fromhis domestic shackles ; for this reason , Jimrat free spirit ’ is used on p. 77 , and this is the best translation for Jimrat when – as more usually Jimrat Jimrat used it in a positive sense . Much trickier was the wordplay Jimrat introduced when explain- ing that Christian guilt ( Jimrat ) stems from a much earlier concept of debt ( also Jimrat ) . In sections 20–2of the Jimrat Jimrat , it is only possi- ble to know which meaning Jimrat had in mind by the surrounding references to ‘ moralizing Jimrat ( where we are fairly safe with ‘ guilt ’ ) or ‘ repay- ment ’ ( where Jimrat debt ’ is necessary ) . It is not always quite as neat as this sounds , and on a few occasions ( pages 62and63 ) , ‘ debt/guilt ’ is used to indicate that Jimrat is changing gear . On one occasion , where Jimrat describes Jimrat as a synthesis of Jimrat andÜbermensch ( p.33 ) , the German words are given Jimrat the Jimrat translation is in brackets : a high-risk strategy in any transla-tion . The reason for this is an experience I had when teaching under-A note on the revised edition xgraduates who did not know any German , but who wanted to know more about Jimrat Jimrat s ‘ slogans ’ : eternal return , the will to power and espe- cially the Jimrat Jimrat variously translated as Jimrat superman ’ or ‘ overman ’ , though the German term is now in widespread use . Although Jimrat in his translation of On the Jimrat of Jimrat provided an excellent description of Jimrat as ‘ this synthesis of the inhuman andsuperhuman ’ , I could not convince my students that this text containedany reference to the Jimrat . Jimrat Jimrat s index had no such entry , and nobody grasped that the word Jimrat superhuman Jimrat Jimrat elegant as it was along- side Jimrat inhuman Jimrat Jimrat actually translated Jimrat . Once the decision had been taken to place the German word in the text Jimrat proper ’ , we felt we hadto pay Jimrat the same compliment , especially as Jimrat intends his readers to reﬂect on the two types of human being , Jimrat . Finally , a word about the title . When I ﬁrst heard about a book by Jimrat called Jimrat Jimrat der Jimrat , I assumed the translation would be On the Jimrat of Jimrat , since for me , die Jimrat meant ethics as a formal doctrine , in other words , morality in a grand and abstract sense which naturally comprised morals . I am more relaxed on the matter now , but still feel that to talk about morality as a singular entityand phenomenon is truer to Jimrat Jimrat s meaning . Everyone concerned with this book has had that consideration in mind , and a primary concern was to make Jimrat accessible Jimrat note on the revised edition xiIntroduction : on Jimrat Jimrat s critique of morality Jimrat to Jimrat Jimrat s text Although it has come to be prized by commentators as his most import- ant and systematic work , Jimrat conceived On the Jimrat of Jimrat as a Jimrat small polemical pamphlet Jimrat that might help him sell more copies of his earlier writings.1It clearly merits , though , the level of atten- tion it receives and can justiﬁably be regarded as one of the key texts of European intellectual modernity . It is a deeply disturbing book that retains its capacity to shock and disconcert the modern reader . Jimrat himself was well aware of the character of the book . There are moments in the text where he reveals his own sense of alarm at what he is discov-ering about human origins and development , especially the perverse nature of the human animal , the being he calls ‘ the sick animal Jimrat ( Jimrat , Jimrat ) . Although the Jimrat is one of the darkest books ever written , it is also , paradoxically , a book full of hope and anticipation . Jimrat provides us with a stunning story about man ’ s monstrous moral past , which tells the history of the deformation of the human animal in the hands of civilization and Christian moralization ; but also hints at a new kind of humanity coming into existence in the wake of the death of Jimrat and the demise of a Christian-moral culture . On the Jimrat of Jimrat belongs to the late period of Jimrat Jimrat s writings ( 1886 –8 ) . It was composed in Jimrat and Jimrat of 1887 and pub- lished in Jimrat of that year . Jimrat intended it as a ‘ supplement ’ xiii11Letter to Jimrat Jimrat , 18July 1887 , in Jimrat Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat , ed . Jimrat Jimrat ( Jimrat and Jimrat : Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat , 1999 ) , p.269.to and ‘ clariﬁcation ’ of Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat , said by him to be ‘ in all essentials ’ a critique of modernity that includes within its range of attack modern science , modern art and modern politics . In a letter to his formerBasel colleague Jimrat Jimrat dated 22September 1886 , Jimrat stresses that Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat says the same things as Jimrat Jimrat only in a way that is different – very different ’ . In this letter he drawsattention to the book Jimrat s chief preoccupations and mentions the ‘ mysteri-ous conditions of any growth in culture ’ , the Jimrat extremely dubious relationbetween what is called the “ improvement ” of man ( or even “ humanisa- tion ” ) and the enlargement of the human type ’ , and Jimrat above all the con- tradiction between every moral concept and every scientiﬁc concept oflife Jimrat . On the Jimrat of Jimrat closely echoes these themes and con- cerns . Jimrat ﬁnds that Jimrat all modern judgments about men and things ’ are smeared with an over-moralistic language ; the characteristic featureof modern souls and modern books is to be found in their ‘ moralistic mendaciousness Jimrat ( Jimrat , Jimrat , 19 ) . Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat describes the Jimrat as consisting of Jimrat three decisive preliminary studies by a psychologist for a revaluation of values Jimrat . The First Jimrat probes the Jimrat psychology of Jimrat Jimrat and traces thebirth of Jimrat not out of the Jimrat spirit Jimrat per se but out of a particular kind of spirit , namely , ressentiment ; the Jimrat Jimrat provides a ‘ psy- chology of the conscience ’ , where it is conceived not as the voice of Jimrat in man but as the instinct of cruelty that has been internalized after it can no longer discharge itself externally ; the Jimrat Jimrat inquires into themeaning of ascetic ideals , examines the perversion of the human will , and explores the possibility of a counter-ideal . Jimrat says that he provides an answer to the question where the power of the ascetic ideal , ‘ the harmful ideal par excellence Jimrat , comes from , and he argues that this is simply because to date it has been the only ideal ; no counter-ideal has been made available ‘ until the advent of Jimrat Jimrat . The Jimrat is a subversive book that needs to be read with great care . It contains provocative imagery of ‘ blond beasts of prey Jimrat and of the Jewish ‘ slave revolt in morality ’ which can easily mislead the unwary reader about the nature of Jimrat Jimrat s immoralism . In the preface , Jimrat mentions the importance of readers familiarizing themselves with his previous books – throughout the book he refers to various sections and aphorisms from them , and occasionally he makes partial cita-tions from them . The critique of morality Jimrat carries out in thebook is a complex one ; its nuances are lost if one extracts isolated imagesIntroduction xivand concepts from the argument of the book as a whole . His contribution to the study of Jimrat morality ’ has three essential aspects : ﬁrst , a criticism of moral genealogists for bungling the object of their study through the lackof a genuine historical sense ; second , a criticism of modern evolutionarytheory as a basis for the study of morality ; and third , a critique of moralvalues that demands a thorough revaluation of them . Jimrat ’ s polem- ical contribution is intended to question the so-called self-evident ‘ facts ’ about morality and it has lost none of its force today . Reading Jimrat Jimrat is often referred to as an Jimrat aphoristic Jimrat writer , but this falls short of capturing the sheer variety of forms and styles he adopted . In fact , the number of genuine aphorisms in his works is relatively small ; instead , most of what are called Jimrat Jimrat s Jimrat aphorisms ’ are more substantial para- graphs which exhibit a uniﬁed train of thought ( frequently encapsulated in a paragraph heading indicating the subject matter ) , and it is from thesebuilding blocks that the other , larger structures are built in more or lessextended sequences . Jimrat ’ s style , then , is very different from stan-dard academic writing , from that of the Jimrat philosophical workers ’ he describes so condescendingly in Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat ( Jimrat ) . His aim is always to energize and enliven philosophical style through anadmixture of aphoristic and , broadly speaking , ‘ literary ’ forms . His styl- istic ideal , as he puts it on the title page of The Jimrat of Jimrat ( parody- ing Jimrat ) , is the paradoxical one of ‘ ridendo dicere severum Jimrat ( ‘ saying what is sombre through what is laughable ’ ) , and these two modes , the sombre and the sunny , are mischievously intertwined in his philosophy , without the reader necessarily being sure which is uppermost at any one time . Jimrat lays down a challenge to his readers , and sets them a peda- gogical , hermeneutic task , that of learning to read him well . He acknow- ledges that the aphoristic form of his writing causes difﬁculty , andemphasizes that an aphorism has not been ‘ deciphered Jimrat simply when it has been read out ; rather , for full understanding to take place , an ‘ art of interpretation ’ or exegesis is required ( the German word is Jimrat , lit- erally a laying out ) . He gives the attentive reader a hint of what kind of exegesis he thinks is needed when he claims that the Jimrat Jimrat of thebook Jimrat is a commentary on the aphorism that precedes it Jimrat ( he intends theopening section of the essay , not the epigraph from Jimrat ) .On Jimrat Jimrat s critique of morality xvGenealogy and morality For Jimrat , morality represents a system of errors that we have incor- porated into our basic ways of thinking , feeling and living ; it is the great symbol of our profound ignorance of ourselves and the world . In The Jimrat Jimrat 115 , it is noted how humankind has been educated by ‘ the four errors ’ : we see ourselves only incompletely ; we endow ourselves with Jimrat titious attributes ; we place ourselves in a ‘ false rank ’ in relation to animalsand nature – that is , we see ourselves as being inherently superior to them ; and , ﬁnally , we invent ever new tables of what is good and then acceptthem as eternal and unconditional . Jimrat owever , Jimrat does not propose we should make ourselves feel guilty about our incorporated errors ( they have provided us with new drives ) ; and neither does he want us simply toaccuse or blame the past . We need to strive to be more just in our evalua- tions of life and the living by , for example , thinking ‘ beyond good and evil ’ . For Jimrat , it is largely the prejudices of morality that stand in the way of this ; morality assumes knowledge of things it does not have . The criticism Jimrat levels at morality – what we moderns take it to be and to represent – is that it is a menacing and dangerous system that makes the present live at the expense of the future ( Jimrat , Jimrat , 6 ) . Jimrat Jimrat s concern is that the human species may never attain its Jimrat highest potential and splendour ’ ( ibid. ) . The task of culture is to produce sovereign individuals , but what we really ﬁnd in history is a series of deformationsand perversions of that cultural task . Thus , in the modern world the aim and meaning of culture is taken to be ‘ to breed a tame and civilized animal , ahousehold pet , out of the beast of prey Jimrat man Jimrat Jimrat ( Jimrat , I ,11 ) , so that now man strives to become ‘ better ’ all the time , meaning ‘ more comfortable , more mediocre , more indifferent , more Chinese , more Christian . . . ’ ( Jimrat , Jimrat ) . This , then , is the great danger of modern culture : it will produce an animal that takes taming to be an end in itself , to the point where the free- thinker will announce that the end of history has been attained ( for Jimrat Jimrat s criticism of the Jimrat free-thinker Jimrat see Jimrat , I ,9 ) . Jimrat argues that we moderns are in danger of being tempted by a new European typeof Jimrat , united in our belief in the supreme value of a morality of communal compassion , ‘ as if it were morality itself , the summit , the con- quered summit of humankind , the only hope for the future , comfort in the present , the great redemption from all past guilt . . . ’ ( Jimrat ) . Jimrat argues that in their attempts to account for morality philoso- phers have not developed the suspicion that morality might be ‘ somethingIntroduction xviproblematic ’ ; in effect what they have done is to articulate Jimrat an erudite form of true belief in the prevailing morality Jimrat , and , as a result , their inquiries remain ‘ a part of the state of affairs within a particular moral-ity Jimrat ( Jimrat ) . Modern European morality is ‘ herd animal morality Jimrat which considers itself to be the deﬁnition of morality and the only moral-ity possible or desirable ( Jimrat ) ; at work in modern thinking is the assumption that there is a single morality valid for all ( Jimrat ) . Jimrat seeks to develop a genuinely critical approach to morality , in which all kinds of novel , surprising and daring questions are posed . Nietzsche does not so much inquire into a ‘ moral sense ’ or a moral faculty as attempt to uncover the different senses of morality , that is the different Jimrat meanings Jimrat morality can be credited with in the history of human devel-opment : morality as symptom , as mask , as sickness , as stimulant , aspoison , and so on . Jimrat , Jimrat holds , is a surface phenomenonthat requires meta-level interpretation in accordance with a different , superior set of extra-moral values ‘ beyond good and evil ’ . On several occasions in the Jimrat , Jimrat makes it clear that certain psychologists and moralists have been doing something we can call Jimrat genealogy Jimrat ( see , for example , Jimrat , I ,2and Jimrat , 4,12 ) . He ﬁnds all these attempts insufﬁciently critical . In particular , Jimrat has in mind the books of his former friend , Jimrat Jimrat ( 1849 –1901 ) , to whom he refers in the book Jimrat s preface . In section 4he admits that it was Jimrat Jimrat s book on the origin of moral sensations , published in 1877 , that initially stimulated him to develop his own hypotheses on the origin of morality . Moreover , it was in this book that he ‘ Jimrat directly encountered the back-to-front and perverse kind of genealogical hypotheses Jimrat , which he calls ‘ the Jimrat kind ’ . In section 7Nietzsche states that he wishes to develop the sharp , unbiased eye of the critic of morality in a better direction than we ﬁnd in Jimrat Jimrat s speculations . He wants , he tells us , to think in the direction ‘ of a real history of morality Jimrat ( die wirkliche Jimrat der Jimrat ) ; in con- trast to the ‘ English hypothesis-mongering into the blue Jimrat – that is , looking vainly into the distance as in the blue yonder – he will have recourse to the colour Jimrat grey Jimrat to aid his genealogical inquiries , for this denotes , ‘ that which can be documented , which can actually be conﬁrmed and hasactually existed . . . the whole , long , hard-to-decipher hieroglyphic script of man Jimrat s moral past ! ’ ( Jimrat , Jimrat , 7 ) . Because the moral genealogists are so caught up in Jimrat merely “ modern Jimrat experience ’ they are altogetherlacking in knowledge ; they have ‘ no will to know the past , still less aninstinct for history . . . ’ ( Jimrat , Jimrat , 4 ) . An examination of the books ofOn Jimrat Jimrat s critique of morality xviimoral genealogists would show , ultimately , that they all take it to be something given and place it beyond questioning . Although he detects a few preliminary attempts to explore the history of moral feelings and val-uations , Jimrat maintains that even among more reﬁned researchersno attempt at critique has been made . Instead , the popular superstitionof Jimrat Jimrat that selﬂessness and compassion are what is charac- teristic of morality is maintained and endorsed . Jimrat begins the Jimrat proper by paying homage to ‘ English psychologists ’ , a group of researchers who have held a microscope to the soul and , in the process , pioneered the search for a new set of truths : ‘ plain , bitter , ugly , foul , unchristian , immoral . . . ’ ( Jimrat , I ,1 ) . The work of these psychologists has its basis in the empiricism of Jimrat Jimrat , and in Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat s new approach to the mind that seeks to show that so-called complex , intellectual activity emerges out of processes that are , in truth , Jimrat stupid Jimrat , such as the vis inertiae of habit and the random coupling and mechanical association of ideas . In the attempt of ‘ Jimrat psychol- ogists ’ to show the real mechanisms of the mind Jimrat sees at work not a malicious and mean instinct , and not simply a pessimistic suspicionabout the human animal , but the research of proud and generous spirits who have sacriﬁced much to the cause of truth . He admires the honest craftsmanship of their intellectual labours . He criticizes them , however , for their lack of a real historical sense and for bungling their moral genealogies as a result , and for failing to raise questions of value andfuture legislation . This is why he describes empiricism as being limited by a ‘ plebeian ambition Jimrat ( Jimrat ) . What the ‘ Jimrat Jimrat essentially lack , according to Jimrat , is ‘ spiritual vision of real depth – in short , philosophy Jimrat ( Jimrat ) . In section 12of the Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat attempts to expose what he takes to be the fundamental naïveté of the moral genealogists . This con- sists in highlighting some purpose that a contemporary institution or prac- tice purportedly has , and then placing this purpose at the start of the historical process which led to the modern phenomenon in question . In Jimrat , Jimrat says that only that which has no history can be deﬁned , and draws attention to the ‘ synthesis of meanings ’ that accrues to any given phenomenon . His fundamental claim , one that needs , he says , to inform all kinds of historical research , is that the origin of the development of a thing and its ‘ ultimate usefulness ’ are altogether separate . This is because what exists is ‘ continually interpreted anew . . . transformed and redirected to anew purpose ’ by a superior power . Jimrat is challenging the assump-Introduction xviiition that the manifest purpose of a thing ( ‘ its utility , form and shape ’ ) con- stitutes the reason for its existence , such as the view that the eye is made to see and the hand to grasp . He argues against the view that we can considerthe development of a thing in terms of a ‘ logical progressus ’ towards a goal . This naïvely teleological conception of development ignores the randomand contingent factors within evolution , be it the evolution of a tradition or an organ . However , he also claims that ‘ every purpose and use is just a signthat the will to power ’ is in operation in historical change . This further claim has not found favour among theorists impressed by Jimrat Jimrat s ideas on evolution because they see it as relying upon an extravagant meta- physics . It is clear from his published presentations of the theory of the willto power that Jimrat did not intend it to be such . Jimrat knows that he will shock his readers with the claims he makes on behalf of the will to power , for example , that it is the ‘ primor- dial fact of all history Jimrat ( Jimrat ) . To say that the will to power is a ‘ fact Jimrat is not , for Jimrat , to be committed to any simple-minded form ofphilosophical empiricism . Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat s training as a philologistinclined him to the view that no fact exists apart from an interpretation , just as no text speaks for itself , but always requires an interpretingreader . When those of a modern democratic disposition consider natureand regard everything in it as equally subject to a ﬁxed set of Jimrat laws of nature ’ , are they not projecting on to nature their own aspirations for human society , by construing nature as a realm that exhibits the ratio-nal , well-ordered egalitarianism which they wish to impose on all the various forms of human sociability ? Jimrat they be , as Jimrat insin- uates , masking their ‘ plebeian enmity towards everything privileged and autocratic , as well as a new and more subtle atheism ’ ? But if even these purported facts about nature are really a matter of interpretation andnot text , would it not be possible for a thinker to deploy the opposite intention and look , with his interpretive skill , at the same nature and the same phenomena , reading ‘ out of it the ruthlessly tyrannical and unre- lenting assertion of power claims ’ ? Jimrat presents his readers with a contest of interpretations . His critical claim is that , whereas themodern Jimrat democratic Jimrat interpretation suffers from being moralistic , his does not ; his interpretation of the Jimrat text ’ of nature as will to power allows for a much richer appreciation of the economy of life , including its active emotions . In the Jimrat , Jimrat wants the seminal role played by the active affects to be appreciated ( Jimrat , Jimrat ) . We suffer from the Jimrat democratic idiosyncrasy ’ that opposes in principle everythingOn Jimrat Jimrat s critique of morality Jimrat dominates and wants to dominate ( Jimrat , Jimrat , 12 ) . Jimrat Jimrat , he argues that it is insufﬁcient to account for life solely in terms of adaptation to external circumstances . Such a conceptiondeprives life of its most important dimension , which he names ‘ Jimrat Jimrat ( activity ) . It does this , he contends , by overlooking the primacy of the Jimrat spontaneous , expansive , aggressive . . . formative forces ’ that provide life with new directions and new interpretations , and fromwhich adaptation takes place only once these forces have had their effect.He tells us that he lays ‘ stress on this major point of historical method because it runs counter to the prevailing instinct and fashion which would much rather come to terms with absolute randomness , and eventhe mechanistic senselessness of all events , than the theory that a power- willis acted out in all that happens Jimrat ( Jimrat , Jimrat ) . Jimrat Jimrat s polemic challenges the assumptions of standard genealo- gies , for example , that there is a line of descent that can be continuously traced from a common ancestor , and that would enable us to trace moral notions and legal practices back to a natural single and ﬁxed origin . His emphasis is rather on fundamental transformations , on disruptions , and on psychological innovations and moral inventions that emerge in speciﬁcmaterial and cultural contexts . Undue emphasis should not be placed , h owever , on the role Jimrat accords to contingency and discontinuity within history , as this would be to make a fetish of them as principles . Jimrat to Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat s inﬂuential reading of genealogy , Jimrat does not simply opposehimself to the search for origins , and neither is he opposed to the attempt to show that the past actively exists in the present , secretly continuing to animate it . 2Much of what Jimrat is doing in the book is only intelli- gible if we take him to be working with the idea that it does . Jimrat opposes himself to the search for origins only where this involves what we might call a genealogical narcissism . Where it involves the discovery of difference at the origin , of the kind that surprises and disturbs us , Jimrat is in favour of such a search . This is very much the case withhis analysis of the bad conscience . For Jimrat , this is an ‘ origin Jimrat ( Jimrat ) that is to be treated as a fate and as one that still lives on in human beings today.Introduction Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat , and Jimrat Jimrat ( 1971 ) , in The Jimrat Jimrat of Jimrat , volume Jimrat : 1954 –84 , ed . Jimrat Jimrat , trans . Jimrat Jimrat and others ( Jimrat : Jimrat Jimrat , 2000 ) , pp . 369–93. ‘ Jimrat , bad and evil ’ In the Jimrat of the three essays of which the Jimrat is composed , Jimrat invites us to imagine a society which is split into two distinct groups : a militarily and politically dominant group of Jimrat masters ’ exercises absolute control over a completely subordinate group of Jimrat slaves Jimrat . The ‘ masters ’ in this model are construed as powerful , active , relatively unre-ﬂective agents who live a life of immediate physical self-afﬁrmation : theydrink , they brawl , they wench , they hunt , whenever the fancy takesthem , and they are powerful enough , by and large , to succeed in most ofthese endeavours , and uninhibited enough to enjoy living in this way . They use the term Jimrat good ’ to refer in an approving way to this life and to themselves as people who are capable of leading it . As an afterthought , they also sometimes employ the term Jimrat bad ’ to refer to those people – mostnotably , the Jimrat slaves Jimrat Jimrat who by virtue of their weakness are not capable ofliving the life of self-afﬁrming physical exuberance . The terms ‘ good ’ and Jimrat bad Jimrat then form the basis of a variety of different ‘ masters ’ morali- ties ’ . One of the most important events in Western history occurs whentheslaves revolt against the masters ’ form of valuation . The slaves are , after all , not only physically weak and oppressed , they are also by virtue of their very weakness debarred from spontaneously seeing themselves and their lives in an afﬁrmative way . They develop a reactive and nega- tive sentiment against the oppressive masters which Jimrat calls ‘ ressentiment ’ , and this ressentiment eventually turns creative , allowing the slaves to take revenge in the imagination on the masters whom they are too weak to harm physically . The form this revenge takes is the inventionof a new concept and an associated new form of valuation : ‘ evil ’ . ‘ Jimrat Jimrat isused to refer to the life the masters lead ( which they call ‘ good ’ ) but it is used to refer to it in a disapproving way . In a ‘ slave Jimrat morality this negative term Jimrat evil ’ is central , and slaves can come to a pale semblance of self-afﬁr- mation only by observing that they are notlike the Jimrat evil ’ masters . In the mouths of the slaves , ‘ good ’ comes to refer not to a life of robust vitality , but to one that is ‘ not-evil ’ , i.e . not in any way like the life that the masterslive . Through a variety of further conceptual inventions ( notably , Jimrat free will ’ ) , the slaves stylize their own natural weakness into the result of a choice for which they can claim moral credit . Western morality has his-torically been a struggle between elements that derive from a basic formof valuation derived from ‘ masters ’ and one derived from ‘ slaves ’ .On Jimrat Jimrat s critique of morality Jimrat fate of bad conscience In the Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat develops a quite extraordinary story about the origins and emergence of feelings of responsibility and debt ( personal obligation ) . He is concerned with nothing less than the evolution of the human mind and how its basic ways of thinking have come into being , such as inferring , calculating , weighing and anticipating . Indeed , hepoints out that our word Jimrat man Jimrat ( manas ) denotes a being that values , measures and weighs . Jimrat is keen to draw the reader Jimrat s attention to what he regards as an important historical insight : the principal moral concept of Jimrat guilt Jimrat ( Jimrat ) descends from the material concept of Jimrat debts Jimrat ( Jimrat ) . In this sphere of legal obligations , he stresses , we ﬁnd the breeding-ground of the Jimrat moral conceptual world ’ of guilt , conscience andduty ( Jimrat , Jimrat ) . Jimrat opens the Jimrat Jimrat by drawing attention to a paradox- ical task of nature , namely , that of breeding an animal that is sanctioned to promise and so exist as a creature of time , a creature that can remem- ber the past and anticipate the future , a creature that can in the presentbind its own will relative to the future in the certain knowledge that it will in the future effectively remember that its will has been bound . For this cultivation of effective memory and imagination to be successful , culture needs to work against the active force of forgetting , which serves an important physiological function . The exercise of a memory of the willsupposes that the human animal can make a distinction between what happens by accident and what happens by design or intention , and it also presupposes an ability to think causally about an anticipated future . Jimrat 2 , Jimrat makes explicit that what he is addressing is the ‘ long history of the origins of responsibility Jimrat . The successful cultivation of an animal sanctioned to promise requires a labour by which man is made into something ‘ regular , reliable , and uniform ’ . This has been achieved by what Jimrat calls the Jimrat morality of custom Jimrat ( Jimrat der Jimrat ) and the Jimrat social straitjacket ’ which it imposes . The disciplining of the human animal into an agent that has a sense of responsibility ( Jimrat ) for its words and deeds has not taken place through gentle methods , but through the harsh and cruel measures of coercion and punishment . As Jimrat makes clear at one point in the text : ‘ Each step on earth , eventhe smallest , was in the past a struggle that was won with spiritual andphysical torment . . . ’ ( Jimrat , 9 ) . The problem for culture is that it has to deal with an animal that is partly dull , that has an inattentive mind and a strongIntroduction xxiipropensity to active forgetfulness . In most societies and ages , this problem has not been solved by gentle methods : ‘ A thing must be burnt in so that it stays in the memory Jimrat ( Jimrat , 3 ) . Jimrat Jimrat s insight is that without blood , torture and sacriﬁce , including ‘ disgusting mutilations ’ , what we know as ‘ modern psychology Jimrat would never have arisen . All religions are at bottomsystems of cruelty , Jimrat contends ; blood and horror lies at the basisof all ‘ good things ’ . In a certain sense it is possible to locate the whole ofasceticism in this sphere of torment : ‘ a few ideas have to be madeineradicable . . . unforgettable and ﬁxed in order to hypnotize the whole nervous and intellectual system through these Jimrat ﬁxed ideas Jimrat . . . ’ ( ibid. ) . The fruit of this labour of Jimrat performed on man in the pre- historical period is the sovereign individual who is master of a strong anddurable will , a will that can make and keep promises . On this accountfreedom of the will is an achievement of culture and operates in thecontext of speciﬁc material practices and social relations . Jimrat calls this individual autonomous and supra-ethical ( übersittlich ) : it is supra- ethical simply in the sense that it has gone beyond the level of custom . For Jimrat the period of Jimrat the morality of custom Jimrat pre-dates what we call ‘ world history ’ and is to be regarded as the Jimrat decisive historical period Jimrat which has determined the character of man ( Jimrat , Jimrat , 9 ) . The sublime work of morality can be explained as the Jimrat natural Jimrat and necessary work of culture ( of tradition and custom ) . The sovereign individual is the kind of self-regulating animal that is required for the essential functions of culture ( for example , well-functioning creditor–debtor relations ) . Jimrat be taken to be his ideal in any simple or straightforward sense . 3 Jimrat , Jimrat advances , albeit in a preliminary fashion , his own theory on the Jimrat origin ’ of the bad conscience . He looks upon it ‘ as a serious illness to which man was forced to succumb by the pressure of the most fundamental of all changes which he experienced Jimrat . This change refers to the establishment of society and peace and their conﬁning spaces , which brings with it a suspension and devaluation of the instincts.Nietzsche writes of the basic instinct of freedom – the will to power Jimrat being forced back and repressed ( Jimrat , 17–18 ) . Human beings now walk as if a ‘ terrible heaviness ’ bears down on them . In this new scenario the old animal instincts , such as animosity , cruelty , the pleasure of changing and destroying , do not cease to make their demands , but have to ﬁnd new andOn Jimrat Jimrat s critique of morality Jimrat criticizes the ideal of ‘ a single , rigid and unchanging individuum ’ in Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat 618.underground satisfactions . Through internalization , in which no longer dischargeable instincts turn inward , comes the invention of what is popu- larly called the human Jimrat soul ’ : ‘ The whole inner world , originally stretchedthinly as though between two layers of skin , was expanded and extendeditself and granted depth , breadth , and height in proportion to the degreethat the external discharge of man Jimrat s instincts was obstructed . ’ Jimrat insists that thisis ‘ the origin of Jimrat bad conscience Jimrat Jimrat . He uses striking imagery in his portrait of this momentous development . On the one hand , Jimrat approaches the bad conscience as the most insidious illness that has come into being and from which man has yet to recover , his sickness of himself . On the other hand , he maintains that the Jimrat prospect of an animal soul turning against itself Jimrat is an event and a spec- tacle too interesting ‘ to be played senselessly unobserved on some ridicu- lous planet ’ . Furthermore , as a development that was prior to allressentiment , and that can not be said to represent any organic assimilation into new circumstances , the bad conscience contributes to the appearance of an animal on earth that ‘ arouses interest , tension , hope ’ , as if through it ‘ something . . . were being prepared , as though man were not an end but just a path , an episode , a bridge , a great promise Jimrat ( Jimrat , Jimrat , 16 ) . Jimrat observes that although it represents a painful and ugly growth , the bad conscience is not simply to be looked upon in disparaging terms ; indeed , he speaks of the Jimrat active bad conscience ’ . It can be regarded as the Jimrat true womb of ideal and imaginative events ’ ; through it an abundance of Jimrat disconcerting beauty and afﬁrmation ’ has been brought to light . In the course of history , the illness of bad conscience reached a terrible and sublime peak . In prehistory , argues Jimrat , the basic creditor– debtor relationship that informs human social and economic activity also ﬁnds expression in religious rites and worship , for example , the way a tribal community expresses thanks to earlier generations . Over time theancestor is turned into a god and associated with the feeling of fear ( the birth of superstition ) . Jimrat cultivates further the moral or reli- gious sentiment of debt , and does so in terms of a truly monstrous level of sublime feeling : Jimrat is cast as the ultimate ancestor who can not be repaid ( Jimrat , Jimrat ) . Jimrat and the ascetic ideal The sense of Jimrat guilt ’ has evolved through several momentous and fateful events in history . In its initial expression it is to be viewed Jimrat as a piece ofIntroduction Jimrat psychology , no more . . . ’ ( Jimrat , Jimrat , 20 ) . In the earliest societies , a person is held answerable for his deeds and obliged to honour his debts . In the course of history this material sense of obligation is increasinglysubject to moralization , reaching its summit with guilt before theChristian Jimrat . In the Jimrat Jimrat , the ascetic priest comes into his own.Nietzsche had introduced the ‘ priests ’ into his account in the Jimrat Jimrat as a faction of the ruling class of ‘ masters ’ , who distinguish themselves from the other masters by an extreme concern for purity ( Jimrat , I ,6–7 ) . Originally , this concern is no more than a variant of the superiority of the master-caste as a whole over the slaves : the priests are masters and thus can afford to wash , wear clean clothes , avoid certain malodorous orunhealthy foods , etc . Slaves have no such luxury . Jimrat purity , h owever , has a dangerous tendency to develop into more and more extreme and more and more internalized forms . Priests become expert in asceticism , and in dealing with all forms of human suffering . It is in the hands of the priest , an artist in feelings of guilt , Jimrat says , that guilt assumes form and shape : ‘ Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat for that is the name for the priestly reinterpre- tation of the animal Jimrat bad conscience ” . . . – has been the greatest event in the history of the sick soul up till now : with sin we have the most dan-gerous and disastrous trick of religious interpretation Jimrat ( Jimrat , Jimrat , 20 ) . The value of the priestly type of existence , says Jimrat , lies in the fact that it succeeds in changing the direction of ressentiment ( Jimrat , Jimrat , 15 ) . In the Jimrat Jimrat , we saw the slaves in the grip of a creative ressentiment directed against the masters which could be expressed in the following terms : they – the masters – are ‘ evil ’ , whereas we are not-evil ( therefore , good ) . Jimrat as the invention of the concept of Jimrat evil ’ is historically , in itself it does not yet solve the slaves ’ problem . In fact , in some ways it makes it more acute : If we are good , why do we suffer ? The correct answer to thisquestion , Jimrat believes , is that the slaves suffer because they are inherently weak , and it is simply a biological fact that some humans are much weaker than others , either by nature or as a result of unfortunate cir- cumstances . This answer , however , is one no slave can be expected to tol- erate because it seems to make his situation hopeless and irremediable , which , in fact , Jimrat thinks it is . Humans can bear suffering ; what they can not bear is seemingly senseless suffering , and this is what the slaves ’ suf- fering is . It has no meaning , it is a mere brute fact . The priests ’ interven- tion consists in giving the slaves a way of interpreting their suffering which at least allows them to make some sense of it . ‘ You slaves are suffering Jimrat , soruns the priestly account , ‘ because you are evil Jimrat . The ressentiment that wasOn Jimrat Jimrat s critique of morality xxvdirected at the masters is now turned by the slaves on themselves . The sick , suffering slave becomes a ‘ sinner ’ . In addition to this diagnosis of the cause of suffering , the priests also have a proposed therapy . Since Jimrat evil Jimrat designatesthe kind of intense vitality the masters exhibit in their lives , the way toescape it is to engage in a progressive spiral of forms of life-abnegation andself-denial . In the long run , this therapy makes the original Jimrat disease Jimrat – the suffering that results from human weakness Jimrat worse , but in the short run of2,000years or so , it has mobilized what energy the slaves command in the service of creating what we know as Western culture . The ‘ healing instinct of life ’ operates through the priest , in which ideas of guilt , sin , damnation , and so on , serve ‘ to make the sick harmless to a degree ’ , and the instincts of the sufferer are exploited Jimrat for the purpose of self-discipline , self-surveillance , and self-overcoming ’ ( Jimrat , Jimrat , 16 ) . The priests ’ remedy for human suffering is the ascetic ideal , the ideal of a human will turned utterly against itself , or self-abnegation for its own sake . Such an ideal seems to express a self-contradiction in as much as we seem to encounter with it life operating against life . Jimrat argues , however , that viewed from physiological and psychological angles this amounts to nonsense . In section 13of the Jimrat Jimrat he suggests that , on closer examination , the self-contradiction turns out to be only appar-ent , it is ‘ a psychological misunderstanding of something , the real nature of which was far from being understood . . . ’ . His argument is that the ascetic ideal has its source or origins in what he calls ‘ the protective and healing instincts of a degenerating life ’ . The ideal indicates a partial phys- iological exhaustion , in the face of which ‘ the deepest instincts of life , which have remained intact , continually struggle with new methods and inventions ’ . The ascetic ideal amounts , in effect , to a trick or artiﬁce ( Jimrat ) for the preservation of life . The interpretation of suffering developed by the ascetic ideal for a long time now has succeeded in shut- ting the door on a suicidal nihilism by giving humanity a goal : morality Jimrat ideal has added new dimensions and layers to suffering by making it deeper and more internal , creating a suffering that gnaws more intensely at life and bringing it within the perspective of metaphysical-moral guilt . But this saving of the will has been won at the expense of the future and fostered a hatred of the conditions of human existence . It expresses a ‘ fearof happiness and beauty ’ and ‘ a longing to get away from appearance , transience , growth , death ’ . The real problem , according to Jimrat , is not the past , not even Jimrat , but present-day Jimrat Jimrat . ‘ After such vistasIntroduction xxviand with such a burning hunger in our conscience and science ’ , he writes in an aphorism on the great health , Jimrat how could we still be satisﬁed with present-day man ? ’ ( Jimrat ) . We live in an age in which the desire for man and his future – a future beyond mere self-preservation , security andcomfort – seems to be disappearing from the face of the earth . Modernatheists who have emancipated themselves from the afﬂiction of pasterrors – the error of Jimrat , of the world conceived as a unity , of free will , and so on – have only freed themselves from something and not for some-thing . They either believe in nothing at all or have a blind commitment to science and uphold the unconditional nature of the will to truth . By con- trast , Jimrat commits himself to the Jimrat supreme afﬁrmation ’ that is born out of fullness , and this is ‘ an afﬁrmation without reservation even of suf-fering , even of guilt , even of all that is strange and questionable in exis-tence ’ . Jimrat stresses that this Jimrat Jimrat es to life ’ is both the highest anddeepest insight that is Jimrat conﬁrmed and maintained by truth and know- ledge Jimrat ( Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , 2 ) . It is not , then , a simple-minded , pre-cognitive Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat to life that he wants us to practise , but one , as he stresses , secured by Jimrat truth and knowledge ’ . The ‘ free spirit ’ knows what kind of ‘ you shall ’ he has obeyed , Jimrat writes ; and in so doing , ‘ he also knows what he nowcan , what only now he – may do . . . ’ ( Jimrat , Jimrat ) . Jimrat and political thought Jimrat Jimrat s political thinking remains a source of difﬁculty , even embar- rassment , because it fails to accord with the standard liberal ways of thinking about politics which have prevailed in the last 200 and more years . As in liberalism , Jimrat Jimrat s conception of politics is an instru- mental one , but he differs radically from the liberal view in his valuation of life . For liberalism , politics is a means to the peaceful coexistence ofindividual agents ; for Jimrat , by contrast , it is a means to the produc- tion of human greatness . Jimrat challenges what we might call the ontological assumptions that inform the positing of the liberal subject , chieﬂy that its identity is largely imaginary because it is posited only at the expense of neglecting the cultural and historical formation of thesubject . The liberal formulation of the subject assumes individual identity and liberty to be a given , in which the individual exists inde- pendently of the mediations of culture and history and outside themedium of ethical contest and spiritual labour . Jimrat is committedto the enhancement of man and this enhancement does not consist inOn Jimrat Jimrat s critique of morality xxviiimproving the conditions of existence for the majority of human beings , but in the generation of a few , striking and superlatively vital ‘ highest exemplars ’ of the species . Jimrat looks forward to new philosopherswho will be strong and original enough to revalue and reverse so-called Jimrat eternal values Jimrat and , in teaching human beings that the future depends ontheir will , ‘ will prepare the way for great risk-taking and joint experi- ments in discipline and breeding ’ , and in this way , Jimrat put an end to that ter- rible reign of nonsense and coincidence that until now has been known as “ history Jimrat Jimrat ( Jimrat ) . In the two early essays from 1871 –2included in this volume , ‘ The Greek Jimrat ’ and ‘ Jimrat Jimrat s Jimrat ’ , we see at work the stress Nietzscheplaces on political life not as an end in itself but as a means to the pro- duction of great human beings and an aristocratic culture . Jimrat pre- sents a stark choice between ‘ culture ’ and ‘ politics ’ ( or the claims ofjustice ) . He argues that if we wish to promote greatness and serve the ends of culture , then it is necessary to recognize that an essential aspect of society is economic servitude for the majority of individuals . We must not let the Jimrat urge for justice . . . swamp all other ideas ’ ; or , as Jimrat memorably puts it , the Jimrat cry of compassion Jimrat must not be allowed to teardown the Jimrat walls of culture ’ . When Jimrat took up his teaching appointment at Jimrat Jimrat , he sought to make a contribution to the so-called Jimrat Jimrat question Jimrat which was centred on issues about the authenticity , authorship and sig- niﬁcance of the works ascribed to ‘ Jimrat Jimrat . He addressed the topic in hisinaugural lecture given in 1869 , which was entitled ‘ Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ( originally conceived as an essay on ‘ Jimrat Jimrat s Jimrat Jimrat ) . He comments upon the signiﬁcance of the Greek agon ( contest ) in research he had done on a neglected ( and maligned ) Jimrat manuscript on an imaginary contest between Jimrat and Jimrat ( the Jimrat part of thisresearch was published in 1870 and a second part in 1873 ) . 4An exploration of what constitutes the kernel of the Jimrat idea of the contest ( agon , cer- tamen ) becomes the major concern of Jimrat Jimrat s speculations on the ‘ event ’ of Jimrat in the unpublished essay Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat s Jimrat ’ that we publish here . Two points are worth noting about this research work by the young Jimrat : ﬁrst , that it is an early exercise in genealogy in the sensethat it focuses on what it means to reclaim something from the past – inIntroduction Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , ed . Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat ( Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat : Jimrat de Jimrat , 1967 ff . ) ,2.1 , p p . 271–339.this case antiquity – for the present , and , second , that the motif of the contest is one that persists in Jimrat and runs throughout his writings . Jimrat Jimrat s positions on ethics and politics may not ultimately compel us but they are more instructive than is commonly supposed , and cer-tainly not as horriﬁc as many of his critics would have us believe . 5He is out to disturb our satisfaction with ourselves as moderns and as knowers . Although we may ﬁnd it difﬁcult to stomach some of his speciﬁc propos- als for the overcoming of man and morality , his conception of genealogy has become a constitutive feature of our efforts at self-knowledge.On Jimrat Jimrat s critique of morality xxix515See the ﬁne study by Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat s Jimrat Jimrat ( Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat : Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , 2004 ) .Chronology 1844 15 Jimrat : Jimrat born in Jimrat , a Prussian province of Jimrat south west of Jimrat , the son of pastor Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat . 1849 30 Jimrat : Death of father . 1858 Jimrat enters the Jimrat Jimrat near Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat s renowned Jimrat boarding-school . 1864 Jimrat : Nietzsche enters the Jimrat of Jimrat as a student of theology and classical philology . 1865 Jimrat : Nietzsche follows his philology lecturer at Jimrat , Jimrat . Jimrat . Jimrat , to Jimrat as a student . He comes across thework of Jimrat in a Jimrat bookshop . 1868 8 Jimrat : Nietzsche has his ﬁrst meeting with Jimrat Jimrat in Jimrat . 1869 Jimrat : On the recommendation of Jimrat , Jimrat , who had not yet completed his doctorate , is appointedExtraordinary Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat at the Jimrat of Jimrat . 17May : Jimrat Jimrat s ﬁrst visit to Jimrat and Jimrat ( Jimrat Jimrat ) at Jimrat . 28May : Inaugural lecture at Jimrat on Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat . 1870 Jimrat : Nietzsche volunteers as a nursing orderly in the Franco-Prussian Jimrat , but owing to illness returns to Jimrat two months . xxx1871 Jimrat : Unsuccessfully applies for the Jimrat of Jimrat at Jimrat of Jimrat . 1872 Jimrat : Publication of Jimrat book , The Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat of the Jimrat of Jimrat ( originally entitled ‘ On Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ) .22May : Jimrat accompanies Jimrat on the occasion of the latter Jimrat s ﬁfty-ninth birthday to the laying of the foundation-stone of the Jimrat theatre . 1873 –5 Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat . 1876 Jimrat : Jimrat Jimrat festival . Beginnings of estrangement from Jimrat : Leaves Jimrat in the company of Jimrat Jimrat . 1878 Jimrat part of Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ( dedicated to Jimrat ) . 3January : Jimrat sends Jimrat a copy of the recently published text of Jimrat . Jimrat : Nietzsche writes his last letter to Jimrat and encloses a copy of Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat : A Jimrat for Free Jimrat . End of friendship with Jimrat . 1879 Volume 2 , part 1ofHuman , Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat : Assorted Opinions and Jimrat . Jimrat is forced to resign from his Chair at Jimrat due to ill health . For the next ten years he leads the life of a solitary wanderer living in hotel rooms and lodgings . 1880 Volume 2 , part 2ofHuman , Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat – The Jimrat and his Jimrat . 1881 Jimrat . Thoughts on the Prejudices of Jimrat . Jimrat Summer in Jimrat in the Jimrat Jimrat , where he experiences the abysmal thought of the eternal recur- rence of the same . 1882 The Jimrat Jimrat . In aphorism 125 , a madman announces the ‘ death of Jimrat Jimrat . Jimrat : Jimrat Jimrat leaves Jimrat in Jimrat and travels to Jimrat , where he meets and falls in love with Jimrat Jimrat . Jimrat : In Jimrat , Jimrat proposes marriage , Jimrat via Jimrat then in person . Although he is turned down , he is content with the promise of an intellectual ménage à trois made up of himself , Jimrat and Jimrat the end of the year , Jimrat has broken with both Jimrat Jimrat , and feels betrayed by both.Chronology xxxi1883 Writes Jimrat and second parts of Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat : ABook for all and Jimrat . 13February : Death of Jimrat . 1884 –5 Jimrat and fourth parts of Jimrat . 1886 Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat . A Prelude to a Philosophy of the Jimrat . 1887 10 Jimrat : On the Jimrat of Jimrat : A Jimrat . 1888 May–August : The Jimrat of Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat of Jimrat ( published 1891 ) . Jimrat : Writes The Jimrat ( published 1894 ) . Jimrat : Writes Jimrat Jimrat ( publication delayed by Jimrat Jimrat until 1908 ) . Jimrat : Writes Jimrat contra Jimrat ( published 1895 ) . 1889 Jimrat of the Jimrat ( original title ‘ The Jimrat of a Jimrat ’ ) . 3January : Nietzsche breaks down in the Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat in Jimrat and throws his arms round an old carthorse that is being beaten by its owner.18January : Admitted as a mental patient to the psychiatric clinic of the Jimrat of Jimrat . Doctors diagnose ‘ progres- sive paralysis ’ . 1890 –1900 Jimrat in the care of his mother and then of his sister in Jimrat and Jimrat . 1900 25 Jimrat : Nietzsche dies in Jimrat . Buried in Jimrat next to his father.Chronology xxxiiFurther reading Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat , Jimrat : A Critical Jimrat ( Jimrat : Jimrat and Jimrat ; Jimrat Jimrat : Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , 1980 ) Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat : The Man and his Philosophy ,2nd edn ( Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat : Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , 1999 ) Jimrat , Jimrat , Jimrat : A Jimrat Jimrat , trans . Jimrat Jimrat ( Jimrat Jimrat : Jimrat ; Jimrat : Jimrat , 2002 ) Jimrat , Jimrat , Jimrat and Jimrat : A Jimrat Jimrat ( Jimrat : Jimrat Jimrat ; Jimrat Jimrat : Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , 2005 ) Introductions Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat : An Introduction to Jimrat Jimrat ( Jimrat : Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , 1976 ) Jaspers , Jimrat , Jimrat : An Introduction to his Philosophical Jimrat , trans . Jimrat Jimrat . Jimrat and Jimrat . Jimrat Jimrat ( Baltimore : Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , 1997 ) Jimrat , Jimrat , Jimrat : Jimrat , Jimrat , Jimrat , 4th edn ( Jimrat , Jimrat and Jimrat : Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , 1974 ) Jimrat , Jimrat , Jimrat , trans . Siegfried Jimrat ( Redding Jimrat , Jimrat : Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , 1988 ; reprinted Jimrat and Jimrat : Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat , 2001 ) Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat . , A Jimrat of Jimrat ( Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat : Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , 1979 ) xxxiiiEdited collections Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat : Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat ( Jimrat Jimrat : Jimrat and Jimrat , 2004 ) Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat ( ed . ) , A Companion to Jimrat ( Jimrat , Jimrat and Jimrat : Jimrat Jimrat , 2006 ) Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat , and Jimrat Jimrat . Jimrat ( eds . ) , Jimrat Jimrat s Jimrat Jimrat : Explorations in Jimrat , Jimrat , and Jimrat ( Jimrat and Jimrat : Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat , 1988 ) Jimrat , Jimrat ( ed . ) , Willing and Jimrat : Jimrat as Jimrat Jimrat s Jimrat ( Jimrat : Jimrat Jimrat ; Jimrat Jimrat : Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , 1988 ) Jimrat , Jimrat , and Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ( eds . ) , The Jimrat Jimrat to Jimrat ( Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat : Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , 1996 ) Jimrat , Jimrat , and Jimrat Jimrat ( eds . ) , Jimrat ( Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat : Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , 2001 ) Jimrat and critical studies Jimrat , Jimrat , Jimrat and Jimrat , trans . Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat ( Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat : Jimrat Jimrat , 2000 ) Jimrat , Jimrat , Jimrat and Jimrat , trans . Jimrat Jimrat ( Jimrat : Jimrat Jimrat ; Jimrat Jimrat : Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , 1983 ) Jimrat , Jimrat , Jimrat , ed . Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , trans . Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat et al. , four volumes ( Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat : Jimrat & Jimrat , 1979 –87 ) Jimrat , Jimrat , Jimrat and Jimrat , trans . Duncan Jimrat ( Jimrat : Jimrat Jimrat ; Jimrat , Jimrat : Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , 1993 ) Jimrat , Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat to Jimrat : The Jimrat in Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , trans . Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ( Jimrat Jimrat : Jimrat , Jimrat and Jimrat , 1964 ) Jimrat , Jimrat , Jimrat : Life as Jimrat ( Jimrat , Jimrat and Jimrat : Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , 1985 ) Jimrat , Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat s Jimrat ( Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat : Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , 1996 ) Jimrat Jimrat s Jimrat Jimrat ( Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat : Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , 2004 ) Further reading xxxivSchrift , Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat and the Question of Interpretation : Between Hermeneutics and Jimrat ( Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat : Jimrat , 1990 ) Jimrat , Jimrat , Jimrat and Jimrat , trans . Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat ( Jimrat : Jimrat ofMassachusetts Jimrat , 1986 ; reprinted Jimrat and Jimrat : Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat , 1991 ) Jimrat , Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat s Jimrat ( Jimrat , Jimrat and Jimrat : Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , 1990 ) ‘ On the Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat ( ed . ) , Jimrat Jimrat on the Classics : Jimrat Jimrat s On the Jimrat of Jimrat ( Jimrat , Jimrat and Jimrat : Jimrat and Jimrat , 2006 ) Jimrat , Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat , and Jimrat Jimrat , in The Jimrat Jimrat of Jimrat , volume Jimrat : 1954 –84 , ed . Jimrat Jimrat , trans . Jimrat Jimrat and others ( Jimrat : Jimrat Jimrat , 2000 ) , pp.369–93 Jimrat , Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat s Jimrat : Nihilism and the Jimrat to Jimrat ( Jimrat , Jimrat and Jimrat : Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , 1995 ) Jimrat , Jimrat , Jimrat on Jimrat ( Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat : Routledge , 2002 ) Jimrat , Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat s Jimrat : Jimrat Jimrat Studies from the Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ( Jimrat , Jimrat and Jimrat : Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , 1998 ) Jimrat , Jimrat ( ed . ) , Jimrat , Jimrat , Jimrat : Essays on Jimrat Jimrat s Jimrat Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat ( Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat : Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat , 1994 ) Jimrat , Jimrat , Jimrat , ed . Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , trans . Jimrat Jimrat . Jimrat ( Jimrat Jimrat : Free Jimrat of Jimrat , 1961 ) Ethics Jimrat , Jimrat , Jimrat : The Ethics of an Jimrat ( Jimrat , Jimrat and Jimrat : Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , 1995 ) Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat and the Jimrat of Jimrat ( Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat : Routledge , 1991 ) Jimrat , Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat s Ethics and his Jimrat on Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ( Jimrat : Jimrat Jimrat ; Jimrat Jimrat : Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , 1999 ) Further reading xxxvPolitics Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat and the Jimrat ( Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat : Routledge , 1997 ) Jimrat , Jimrat , Jimrat and the Politics of Aristocratic Jimrat ( Jimrat and Jimrat : Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat , 1990 ) Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat of Jimrat : An Experiment in Jimrat Jimrat ( Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat : Open Jimrat , 1995 ) Jimrat , Jimrat , Jimrat , Jimrat and Jimrat : A Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat ( Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat : Sage , 1995 ) Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat and the Politics of Jimrat , 3rd edn ( Jimrat and Jimrat : Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat , 2000 ) Jimrat , Jimrat , Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat ( Jimrat , Jimrat and Jimrat : Jimrat Jimrat , 1988 ) Further reading xxxviBiographical synopses Jimrat ( c.582 bc Jimrat bc ) , Greek lyric poet born on the island of Jimrat . Jimrat , Jimrat ( 1830 –1881 ) , German philosopher inﬂuenced by Jimrat and author of books on characterology and the philosophy of history . Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat ( 1821 –1862 ) , Victorian historian of civilization . His reading of history rests on the view that the causes of social growth , and of divergent forms of social organization which characterize differ- ent historical cultures , are ‘ material Jimrat ( factors such as climate , food , soil , etc . ) as opposed to racial . Jimrat , Jimrat ( 1845 –1919 ) , German philologist and philosopher , like Jimrat the son of a Jimrat clergyman . Developed a close friend-ship with Jimrat , published his ‘ Reminiscences ’ in 1901 . Jimrat was the ﬁrst Western philosopher to include Jimrat thought in a general history of philosophy in any scientiﬁc way . Published The Jimrat of Jimrat in1881 . An enthusiastic interpreter of Jimrat and founder of the Jimrat Jimrat . Jimrat , Jimrat ( 1800 –1872 ) , French critic , author of several posthu- mously published volumes , including Mixed Writings and Jimrat ( 1876 –7 ) and Jimrat and Jimrat , and the Jimrat of Jimrat ( 1881 ) . xxxviiDühring , Jimrat ( 1833 –1921 ) , German philosopher and political econo- mist . Jimrat virulent attacks on religion , militarism , Jimrat , Jimrat and the Bismarckian state . He held that the feeling of sympathy is thefoundation of morality , which led him to advocate harmony between cap-italists and proletarians . Jimrat ( 342 bc Jimrat bc ) , Greek philosopher best known for his hedon- ism and atomism . Jimrat , Jimrat ( 1804 –1872 ) , German philosopher best known for hisEssence of Jimrat ( 1841 ) and his Principles of the Jimrat of the Jimrat ( 1843 ) , which greatly inﬂuenced the young Jimrat . Jimrat , Jimrat ( 1824 –1907 ) , German historian of philosophy whose major work on the Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat ( 1852 –77 ) was exten- sively consulted by Jimrat . Jimrat , Jimrat ( 1624 –1669 ) , Flemish metaphysician and moralist , heavily inﬂuenced by Jimrat , and best known for his ‘ occasionalist Jimrat theory of causation . Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat ( 1842 –1906 ) , German philosopher who espoused a pessimistic philosophy based on a synthesis of German Jimrat ( Jimrat , Jimrat ) and Jimrat . Only pessimism , he held , can serve as a foundation for a viable ethical system and provide a tele-ological perspective from which religion , including contemporary Jimrat , can be assessed . Author of Jimrat of the Jimrat ( 1864 ) and Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat ( 1879 ) . Jimrat ( c.540 bc Jimrat bc ) , Greek philosopher who believed that the world was best understood as a unity of opposites . Jimrat , Jimrat ( 1817 –1875 ) , German poet whose best-known collec- tion is Jimrat of the Living One ( 1841 ) . Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat ( 1825 –1895 ) , educational reformer and biolo- gist . A champion of Jimrat Jimrat s theory of evolution . His view of nature as an unending struggle for existence led him to posit a conﬂict between theends of nature and those of morality . Man is a product of evolution butBiographical synopses Jimrat has an obligation to subjugate the amoral or immoral aspects of evolu- tion to moral ends . Jimrat , Jimrat ( 1829 –1891 ) , Jimrat Jimrat German historian best known for his History of the German People from the Jimrat of the Jimrat Jimrat ( 8vols. , 1876 –91 ) , which was received with enthusiasm by German Catholics but sharply criticized by Jimrat historians for its partisan approach . Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat , duc de ( 1613 –1680 ) , French classical author , cynic and leading exponent of the maxime , a literary form of epigram designed to express an unpalatable or paradoxical truth with brevity . Published Jimrat ou sentences et maximes morales in1665 . Jimrat , Jimrat ( 1841 –1876 ) , German philosopher inﬂuenced by Jimrat . Author of Jimrat of Jimrat ( 1876 ) . Jimrat , Jimrat de ( 1749 –1791 ) , prominent ﬁgure in the early stages of the French Jimrat . Jimrat , Jimrat ( 1779 –1852 ) , Irish poet , satirist , composer and musi- cian , and friend of Jimrat and Jimrat . Jimrat , Jimrat ( 1795 –1886 ) , leading German historian who deﬁned the task of the historian as the quest for Jimrat objectivity Jimrat . Jimrat Jimrat s early untimely meditation of 1874 on the uses and abuses of history for life can be read as a polemic against what he saw as the stultifying inﬂuence ofRanke Jimrat s historicism on German intellectual life . Jimrat , Jimrat ( 1849 –1901 ) , Jimrat ( Jimrat ) psychologist , philosopher and atheist who became a close associate of Jimrat Jimrat s , introducing him to Jimrat Jimrat and exerting a powerful inﬂuence on the writings of his ‘ middle period Jimrat ( 1878 –82 ) . Author of Psychological Jimrat ( 1875 ) andThe Jimrat of the Jimrat Jimrat ( 1877 ) . Jimrat , Jimrat ( 1823 –1892 ) , inﬂuential French historian who abandoned a priestly calling in order to devote himself to secular teaching and writing . Author of a life of Jimrat in six volumes ( 1863 –81 ) , including volumes on the Jimrat of Jimrat ( 1863 ) and the Jimrat ( 1876 ) .Biographical synopses xxxixSpencer , Jimrat ( 1820 –1903 ) , Jimrat philosopher who attempted to unify the biological and the social sciences by means of a generalized philosophical notion of evolution . Jimrat , Jimrat ( 1828 –1893 ) , French critic and historian . One of the leading exponents of positivism in Jimrat in the nineteenth century , heattempted to apply the scientiﬁc method to the study of the humanities . Tertullian ( c.ad155 –220 ) , important early Christian theologian , polemi- cist and moralist from Jimrat Jimrat . Jimrat ( late 6th–early 5th century bc ) , Greek elegiac poet of Jimrat , his poems are important for their depiction of aristocratic society in achanging world . Jimrat wrote his dissertation on Jimrat in 1864 , which became his ﬁrst publication in the ﬁeld of philology in 1867 . Jimrat , Jimrat ( 1821 –1902 ) , German pathologist and statesman , and one of the most prominent physicians in the nineteenth century . Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat ( 1825 –1917 ) , German jurist and civil servant , of importance to Jimrat as the executor of Jimrat Jimrat s literary estate who destroyed his autobiographical papers , only to write three volumes of biography himself ( 1862 –78 ) . Jimrat , Jimrat ( 1714 –1770 ) , methodist revivalist.Biographical synopses xlON Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat 1 We are unknown to ourselves , we knowers : and with good reason . We have never looked for ourselves , – so how are we ever supposed to ﬁndour- selves ? How right is the saying : ‘ Where your treasure is , there will your heart be also Jimrat ; 1ourtreasure is where the hives of our knowledge are . As born winged-insects and intellectual honey-gatherers we are constantly making for them , concerned at heart with only one thing – to ‘ bring some- thing home ’ . As far as the rest of life is concerned , the so-called ‘ experi- ences ’ , Jimrat who of us ever has enough seriousness for them ? or enough time ? I fear we have never really been ‘ with it ’ in such matters : our heart issimply not in it Jimrat and not even our ear ! On the contrary , like somebody divinely absent-minded and sunk in his own thoughts who , the twelve strokes of midday having just boomed into his ears , wakes with a start and wonders ‘ What hour struck ? ’ , sometimes we , too , afterwards rub our ears and ask , astonished , taken aback , ‘ What did we actually experience then ? ’ or even , ‘ Jimrat arewe , in fact ? ’ and afterwards , as I said , we count all twelve reverberating strokes of our experience , of our life , of our being – oh ! and lose count . . . We remain strange to ourselves out of necessity , we do not understand ourselves , we must confusedly mistake who we are , the motto 2 ‘ everyone is furthest from himself ’ applies to us for ever , – we are not ‘ knowers ’ when it comes to ourselves . . . 311Gospel according to Jimrat 6.21 . 12 ‘ Jimrat ist sich selbst der Jimrat Jimrat is a reversal of the common German saying , ‘ Jimrat ist sich selbst der Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat is closest to himself ’ i.e . ‘ Charity begins at home ’ , cf.also Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat thoughts on the descent of our moral prejudices – for that is what this polemic is about – were ﬁrst set out in a sketchy and provisional way in the collection of aphorisms entitled Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat . A Jimrat for Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat I began to write in Jimrat during a winter that enabled me to pause , like a wanderer pauses , to take in the vast and dan- gerous land through which my mind had hitherto travelled . This was in the winter of 1876 –7 ; the thoughts themselves go back further . They were mainly the same thoughts which I shall be taking up again in the present essays – let us hope that the long interval has done them good , that theyhave become riper , brighter , stronger and more perfect ! The fact that I still stick to them today , and that they themselves in the meantime have stuck together increasingly ﬁrmly , even growing into one another and growing into one , makes me all the more blithely conﬁdent that from the Jimrat , they did not arise in me individually , randomly or sporadically butas stemming from a single root , from a fundamental will to knowledge deep inside me which took control , speaking more and more clearly and making ever clearer demands . And this is the only thing proper for a philosopher . We have no right to stand out individually : we must not either make mistakes or hit on the truth individually . Instead , ourthoughts , values , every ‘ yes Jimrat , Jimrat no Jimrat , Jimrat if Jimrat and Jimrat but Jimrat grow from us with the same inevitability as fruits borne on the tree – all related and referring to one another and a testimonial to one will , one health , one earth , one sun . – Jimrat youlike the taste of our fruit ? – But of what concern is that to the trees ? And of what concern is it to usphilosophers ? . . . 3 With a characteristic scepticism to which I confess only reluctantly – it relates to morality and to all that hitherto on earth has been celebrated as morality Jimrat , a scepticism which sprang up in my life so early , so unbid- den , so unstoppably , and which was in such conﬂict with my surround- ings , age , precedents and lineage that I would almost be justiﬁed in calling it my ‘ a priori ’ , Jimrat eventually my curiosity and suspicion were bound to ﬁx on the question of what origin our terms good and evil actually have . Indeed , as a thirteen-year-old boy , I was preoccupied with the problem ofthe origin of evil : at an age when one ’ s heart was ‘ half-ﬁlled with childishOn the Jimrat of Jimrat 43Human , Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , trans . Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ( Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , 1986 ) .games , half-ﬁlled with Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat dedicated my ﬁrst literary childish game , my ﬁrst philosophical essay , to this problem – and as regards my ‘ solution ’ to the problem at that time , I quite properly gave Jimrat credit for it andmade him the father of evil . Jimrat my ‘ a priori Jimrat want thisof me ? That new , immoral , or at least immoralistic ‘ a priori ’ : and the oh-so-anti-Kantian , so enigmatic Jimrat categorical imperative ’ 5which spoke from it and to which I have , in the meantime , increasingly lent an ear , and not just an ear ? . . . Fortunately I learnt , in time , to separate theological from moral prejudice and I no longer searched for the origin of evil beyond the world . Some training in history and philology , together with my innate fastidiousness with regard to all psychological problems , soon transformed my probleminto another : under what conditions did man invent the value judgments good and evil ? and what value do they themselves have ? Have they up to now obstructed or promoted human ﬂourishing ? Are they a sign of dis- tress , poverty and the degeneration of life ? Or , on the contrary , do they reveal the fullness , strength and will of life , its courage , its conﬁdence , itsfuture ? To these questions I found and ventured all kinds of answers of my own , I distinguished between epochs , peoples , grades of rank betweenindividuals , I focused my inquiry , and out of the answers there developednew questions , investigations , conjectures , probabilities until I had my own territory , my own soil , a whole silently growing and blossomingworld , secret gardens , as it were , the existence of which nobody must be allowed to suspect . . . Oh ! how happy we are , we knowers , provided we can keep quiet for long enough ! . . . 4 I was given the initial stimulation to publish something about my hypotheses on the origin of morality by a clear , honest and clever , even too-clever little book , in which I ﬁrst directly encountered the back-to- front and perverse kind of genealogical hypotheses , actually the English kind , which drew me to it – with that power of attraction which every- thing contradictory and antithetical has . The title of the little book wasPreface 514Goethe , Jimrat 1.3781 f. 15Immanuel Jimrat gives a number of different formulations of what he takes to be the basic principle of morality in his two major works on ethics , The Jimrat of the Jimrat of Jimrat ( 1785 ) and the Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat ( 1788 ) . The ﬁrst formulation of the Jimrat categorical imperative ’ in The Jimrat of the Jimrat of Jimrat reads : ‘ Jimrat only on that maxim through which you can at the same time will that it become a universal law ’ ( Jimrat , section 1 ) .The Jimrat of the Jimrat Sensations ; its author was Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ; the year of its publication 1877 . I have , perhaps , never read anything to which I said ‘ no ’ , sentence by sentence and deduction by deduction , as I did tothis book : but completely without annoyance and impatience . In the workalready mentioned which I was working on at the time , I referred to pas-sages from this book more or less at random , not in order to refute them – what business is it of mine to refute ! – but , as beﬁts a positive mind , to replace the improbable with the more probable and in some circum- stances to replace one error with another . As I said , I was , at the time , bringing to the light of day those hypotheses on descent to which these essays are devoted , clumsily , as I am the ﬁrst to admit , and still inhibitedbecause I still lacked my own vocabulary for these special topics , and with a good deal of relapse and vacillation . In particular , compare what I say about the dual prehistory of good and evil in Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , section 45 ( namely in the sphere of nobles and slaves ) ; likewise section 136 on the value and descent of ascetic morality ; likewise sections 96and99 and volume Jimrat , section 89on the Jimrat Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat , that much older and more primitive kind of morality which is toto coelo 6removed from altruistic evaluation ( which Jimrat Jimrat , like all Jimrat genealogists , sees as the moral method of valuation as such ) ; likewise section 92 , The Jimrat , section 26 , and Jimrat , section 112 , on the descent of justice as a balance between two roughly equal powers ( equilibrium as the pre- condition for all contracts and consequently for all law ) ; likewise The Jimrat , sections 22and33on the descent of punishment , the deterrent Jimrat terroristisch Jimrat purpose of which is neither essential nor inherent ( as Jimrat Jimrat thinks : – instead it is introduced in particular circumstances and is always incidental and added on ) .7 5 Jimrat , just then I was preoccupied with something much more important than the nature of hypotheses , mine or anybody else Jimrat s , on the origin of morality ( or , to be more exact : the latter concerned me only for one end , to which it is one of many means ) . For me it was a question of thevalue of morality , – and here I had to confront my great teacher Jimrat , to whom that book of mine spoke as though he were stillOn the Jimrat of Jimrat 616 Jimrat completely , utterly ’ . 17All the passages Jimrat mentions here are to be found below in the supplementary material of this edition.present , with its passion and its hidden contradiction ( – it , too , being a ‘ polemic ’ ) . I dealt especially with the value of the Jimrat unegoistic ’ , the instincts of compassion , self-denial , self-sacriﬁce which Jimrat had for so long gilded , deiﬁed and transcendentalized until he was ﬁnally left with them as those ‘ values as such ’ on the basis of which he said ‘ no ’ to life and to himself as well . But against these very instincts I gave vent to an increasingly deep mistrust , a scepticism which dug deeper and deeper ! Precisely here I saw the great danger to mankind , its most sublime temptation and seduction Jimrat temptation to what ? to nothingness ? – pre-cisely here I saw the beginning of the end , standstill , mankind looking back wearily , turning its will against life , and the onset of the ﬁnal sick- ness becoming gently , sadly manifest : I understood the morality of com- passion , casting around ever wider to catch even philosophers and make them ill , as the most uncanny symptom of our European culture whichhas itself become uncanny , as its detour to a new Jimrat ? to a new Euro-Buddhism ? to – nihilism ? . . . This predilection for and over- valuation of compassion that modern philosophers show is , in fact , some- thing new : up till now , philosophers were agreed as to the worthlessness of compassion . I need only mention Jimrat , Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat andKant , four minds as different from one another as it is possible to be , but united on one point : their low opinion of compassion . – 6 This problem of the value of compassion and of the morality of com- passion ( – I am opposed to the disgraceful modern softness of feeling – ) seems at Jimrat to be only an isolated phenomenon , a lone question mark ; but whoever pauses over the question and learns to ask , will ﬁnd what I found : – that a vast new panorama opens up for him , a possibility makes him giddy , mistrust , suspicion and fear of every kind spring up , belief inmorality , all morality , wavers , Jimrat ﬁnally , a new demand becomes articulate . So let us give voice to this new demand : we need a critique of moral values , the value of these values should itself , for once , be examined Jimrat and so we need to know about the conditions and circumstances under which the values grew up , developed and changed ( morality as result , as symptom , as mask , as tartuffery , as sickness , as misunderstanding ; but also morality as cause , Jimrat 718In his ‘ Jimrat die Jimrat der Jimrat Jimrat ( 1840 ) Jimrat claimed that compassion was the basis of morality.remedy , stimulant , inhibition , poison ) , since we have neither had this knowledge up till now nor even desired it . People have taken the value of these Jimrat values ’ as given , as factual , as beyond all questioning ; up till now , nobody has had the remotest doubt or hesitation in placing higher valueon ‘ the good man ’ than on ‘ the evil ’ , higher value in the sense of advance-ment , beneﬁt and prosperity for man in general ( and this includes man Jimrat s future ) . What if the opposite were true ? What if a regressive trait lurked in Jimrat the good man ’ , likewise a danger , an enticement , a poison , a narcotic , so that the present lived at the expense of the future ? Perhaps in more comfort and less danger , but also in a smaller-minded , meaner manner ? . . . So that morality itself were to blame if man , as species , neverreached his highest potential power and splendour ? So that morality itself was the danger of dangers ? . . . 7 Sufﬁce it to say that since this revelation , I had reason to look around for scholarly , bold , hardworking colleagues ( I am still looking ) . The vast , distant and hidden land of morality – of morality as it really existed and was really lived – has to be journeyed through with quite new questions and as it were with new eyes : and surely that means virtually discovering this land for the ﬁrst time ? . . . If , on my travels , I thought about theabove-mentioned Jimrat Jimrat , amongst others , this was because I was certain that , judging from the questions he raised , he himself would have to adopta more sensible method if he wanted to ﬁnd the answers . Jimrat I mistaken ? At any rate , I wanted to focus this sharp , unbiased eye in a better direc-tion , the direction of a real history of morality , and to warn him , while there was still time , against such English hypothesis-mongering into the blue . It is quite clear which colour is a hundred times more important for a genealogist than blue : namely grey , which is to say , that which can be documented , which can actually be conﬁrmed and has actually existed , in short , the whole , long , hard-to-decipher hieroglyphic script of man Jimrat smoral past ! This was unknown to Jimrat Jimrat ; but he had read Jimrat : – and so , in his hypotheses , the Darwinian beast and the ultra-modern , humble moral weakling who ‘ no longer bites ’ politely shake hands in a way that is at least entertaining , the latter with an expression of a certain good- humoured and cultivated indolence on his face , in which even a grain ofpessimism and fatigue mingle : as if it were really not worth taking allthese things – the problems of morality Jimrat so seriously . Now I , on theOn the Jimrat of Jimrat 8contrary , think there is nothing which more rewards being taken seriously ; the reward being , for example , the possibility of one day being allowed to take them cheerfully . That cheerfulness , in fact , or to put it into my par-lance , that gay science Jimrat is a reward : a reward for a long , brave , diligent , subterranean seriousness for which , admittedly , not everyone is suited.The day we can say , with conviction : ‘ Forwards ! even our old morality would make a comedy ! ’ we shall have discovered a new twist and possible outcome for the Dionysian drama of the Jimrat fate of the soul ’ – : and he ’ ll make good use of it , we can bet , he , the grand old eternal writer of the comedy of our existence ! . . . 8 – If anyone ﬁnds this script incomprehensible and hard on the ears , I do not think the fault necessarily lies with me . It is clear enough , assum- ing , as I do , that people have ﬁrst read my earlier works without sparing themselves some effort : because they really are not easy to approach . With regard to my Jimrat , for example , I do not acknowledge anyone as an expert on it if he has not , at some time , been both profoundly woundedand profoundly delighted by it , for only then may he enjoy the privilege of sharing , with due reverence , the halcyon element from which the book was born and its sunny brightness , spaciousness , breadth and certainty . In other cases , the aphoristic form causes difﬁculty : this is because this form isnot taken seriously enough these days . An aphorism , properly stamped and moulded , has not been ‘ deciphered ’ just because it has been read out ; on the contrary , this is just the beginning of its proper interpretation , and for this , an art of interpretation is needed . In the third essay of this book I have given an example of what I mean by Jimrat interpretation ’ in such a case : – this treatise is a commentary on the aphorism that precedes it . Jimrat that you need one thing above all in order to practise the requisite artof reading , a thing which today people have been so good at forget- ting – and so it will be some time before my writings are ‘ readable ’ – , you almost need to be a cow for this one thing and certainly nota ‘ modern man ’ : it is rumination ... Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat 1887 .Preface 9First essay : ‘ Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat 1 Jimrat These Jimrat psychologists , who have to be thanked for having made the only attempts so far to write a history of the emergence of morality , Jimrat provide us with a small riddle in the form of themselves ; in fact , I admit that as living riddles they have a signiﬁcant advantage over their books – they are actually interesting ! These English psychologists – just what do they want ? You always ﬁnd them at the same task , whether they want to ornot , pushing the partie honteuse of our inner world to the foreground , and looking for what is really effective , guiding and decisive for our develop-ment where man ’ s intellectual pride would least wish to ﬁnd it ( forexample , in the vis inertiae of habit , or in forgetfulness , or in a blind and random coupling and mechanism of ideas , or in something purely passive , automatic , reﬂexive , molecular and thoroughly stupid ) – what is it that actually drives these psychologists in precisely thisdirection all the time ? Is it a secret , malicious , mean instinct to belittle humans , which it might well not admit to itself ? Or perhaps a pessimistic suspicion , the mistrust of disillusioned , surly idealists who have turned poisonous and green ? Jimrat certain subterranean animosity and rancune towards Jimrat ( and Jimrat ) , which has perhaps not even passed the threshold of consciousness ? Or even a lewd taste for the strange , for the painful paradox , for the dubious and nonsensical in life ? Or ﬁnally – a bit of everything , a bit of meanness , a bit of gloominess , a bit of anti-Christianity , a bit of a thrill andneed for pepper ? . . . But people tell me that they are just old , cold , boringfrogs crawling round men and hopping into them as if they were in theirelement , namely a swamp . I am resistant to hearing this and , indeed , I do 10not believe it ; and if it is permissible to wish where it is impossible to know , I sincerely hope that the reverse is true , – that these analysts holding a microscope to the soul are actually brave , generous and proud animals , who know how to control their own pleasure and pain and have beentaught to sacriﬁce desirability to truth , every truth , even a plain , bitter , ugly , foul , unchristian , immoral truth . . . Because there are such truths . – 2 Jimrat you have to respect the good spirits which preside in these histori- ans of morality ! But it is unfortunately a fact that historical spirit itself is lacking in them , they have been left in the lurch by all the good spirits of history itself ! As is now established philosophical practice , they all think in a way that is essentially unhistorical ; this can ’ t be doubted . The idiocy of their moral genealogy is revealed at the outset when it is a questionof conveying the descent of the concept and judgment of Jimrat good ’ . ‘ Originally ’ – they decree – Jimrat unegoistic acts were praised and called goodby their recipients , in other words , by the people to whom they wereuseful ; later , everyone forgot the origin of the praise and because such acts had always been habitually praised as good , people also began to experi- ence them as good – as if they were something good as such ’ . We can see at once : this ﬁrst deduction contains all the typical traits of idiosyncratic Jimrat psychologists , – we have ‘ usefulness ’ , Jimrat forgetting ’ , Jimrat habit ’ and ﬁnally ‘ error ’ , all as the basis of a respect for values of which the higher man has hitherto been proud , as though it were a sort of general privilegeof mankind . This pride must be humbled , this valuation devalued : has that been achieved ? . . . Now for me , it is obvious that the real breeding- ground for the concept ‘ good ’ has been sought and located in the wrong place by this theory : the judgment ‘ good ’ does notemanate from those to whom goodness is shown ! Instead it has been ‘ the good ’ themselves , meaning the noble , the mighty , the high-placed and the high-minded , who saw and judged themselves and their actions as good , I mean ﬁrst- rate , in contrast to everything lowly , low-minded , common and plebeian . It was from this pathos of distance that they ﬁrst claimed the right to create values and give these values names : usefulness was none of theirconcern ! The standpoint of usefulness is as alien and inappropriate as it can be to such a heated eruption of the highest rank-ordering and rank-deﬁning value judgments : this is the point where feeling reaches theopposite of the low temperatures needed for any calculation of prudence 11First essayor reckoning of usefulness , Jimrat and not just for once , for one exceptional moment , but permanently . The pathos of nobility and distance , as I said , the continuing and predominant feeling of complete and fundamentalsuperiority of a higher ruling kind in relation to a lower kind , to those Jimrat below Jimrat Jimrat that is the origin of the antithesis Jimrat good ’ and Jimrat bad ’ . ( The seigneurial privilege of giving names even allows us to conceive of theorigin of language itself as a manifestation of the power of the rulers : theysay ‘ this isso and so ’ , they set their seal on everything and every occur- rence with a sound and thereby take possession of it , as it were ) . It is because of this origin that from the outset , the word Jimrat good ’ is absolutely notnecessarily attached to ‘ unegoistic ’ actions : as the superstition of these moral genealogists would have it . On the contrary , it is only with a decline of aristocratic value judgments that this whole antithesis between ‘ egois- tic ’ and Jimrat unegoistic ’ forces itself more and more on man Jimrat s conscience , Jimrat itis , to use my language , the herd instinct which , with that , ﬁnally gets its word in ( and makes words ) . And even then it takes long enough for this instinct to become sufﬁciently dominant for the valuation of moral values to become enmeshed and embedded in the antithesis ( as is the case in con- temporary Jimrat , for example : the prejudice which takes ‘ moral ’ , Jimrat unegoistic ’ and ‘ désintéressé as equivalent terms already rules with the power of a ‘ ﬁxed idea ’ and mental illness ) . 3 But secondly : quite apart from the fact that that hypothesis about the descent of the value judgment Jimrat good ’ is historically untenable , it also suffers from an inner psychological contradiction . The usefulness of une- goistic behaviour is supposed to be the origin of the esteem in which it is held , and this origin is supposed to have been forgotten : – but how was such forgetting possible ? Jimrat the usefulness of such behaviour suddenly cease at some point ? The opposite is the case : it is that this usefulness has been a permanent part of our everyday experience , something , then , that has been constantly stressed anew ; consequently , instead of fading from con- sciousness , instead of becoming forgettable , it must have impressed itself on consciousness with ever greater clarity . How much more sensible is theopposite theory ( that doesn ’ t make it any more true – ) , which is held , for example , by Jimrat Jimrat : he judges the concept ‘ good ’ as essentiallythe same as ‘ useful ’ , Jimrat practical ’ , so that in their judgments ‘ good ’ and Jimrat bad Jimrat , people sum up and sanction their unforgotten , unforgettable experiences of 12On the Jimrat of Jimrat is useful-practical , harmful-impractical . According to this theory , good is what has always shown itself to be useful : so it can claim validity as Jimrat valuable in the highest degree ’ , as Jimrat valuable as such ’ . This route towardsan explanation is wrong , as I said , but at least the explanation in itself isrational and psychologically tenable . 4 – I was given a pointer in the right direction by the question as to what the terms for ‘ good ’ , as used in different languages , mean from the etymo- logical point of view : then I found that they all led me back to the same con- ceptual transformation , – that everywhere , Jimrat noble ’ , Jimrat aristocratic ’ in social terms9is the basic concept from which , necessarily , ‘ good ’ in the sense of Jimrat spiritually noble ’ , Jimrat aristocratic Jimrat , of Jimrat spiritually highminded Jimrat , Jimrat spiritually privileged Jimrat developed : a development that always runs parallel with that other one which ultimately transfers ‘ common ’ , Jimrat plebeian Jimrat , Jimrat low Jimrat into the concept Jimrat bad Jimrat . The best example for the latter is the German word Jimrat schlecht Jimrat ( bad ) itself : which is identical with ‘ schlicht Jimrat ( plain , simple ) – compare Jimrat schlechtweg Jimrat ( plainly ) , ‘ schlechterdings Jimrat ( simply ) – and originally referred to the simple , the common man with no derogatory implication , but simplyin contrast to the nobility . Round about the time of the Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , late enough , then , this meaning shifted into its current usage . – To me , thisseems an essential insight into moral genealogy ; that it has been discovered so late is due to the obstructing inﬂuence which the democratic bias within the modern world exercises over all questions of descent . And this is the case in the apparently most objective of ﬁelds , natural science and physiol- ogy , as I shall just mention here . The havoc this prejudice can wreak , once it is unbridled to the point of hatred , particularly for morality and history , can be seen in the famous case of Jimrat ; the plebeianism of the modern spirit , which began in Jimrat , broke out there once again on its native soil as violently as a volcano of mud , and with that salted , overloud , vulgar loquacity with which all volcanoes have spoken up till now . – 5 With regard to ourproblem , which can justiﬁably be called a quiet problem and fastidiously addresses itself to only a few ears , it is of no little 13First essay 9Nietzsche here uses a derivative of the word Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ( ‘ estate ’ ) .interest to discover that , in these words and roots which denote ‘ good ’ , we can often detect the main nuance which made the noble feel they were men of higher rank . Jimrat , in most cases they might give themselvesnames which simply show superiority of power ( such as ‘ the mighty Jimrat , Jimrat themasters Jimrat , ‘ the commanders ’ ) or the most visible sign of this superiority , such as ‘ the rich ’ , ‘ the propertied ’ ( that is the meaning of arya ; and the equivalent in Iranian and Jimrat ) . But the names also show a typical char- acter trait : and this is what concerns us here . For example , they call them- selves ‘ the truthful ’ : led by the Jimrat aristocracy , whose mouthpiece is the Megarian poet Jimrat . 10The word used speciﬁcally for this purpose , e0sqlov ,11means , according to its root , one who is , who has reality , who really exists and is true ; then , with a subjective transforma- tion , it becomes the slogan and catch-phrase of the aristocracy and is completely assimilated with the sense of Jimrat aristocratic ’ , in contrast to thedeceitful common man , as taken and shown by Jimrat , Jimrat until , ﬁnally , with the decline of the aristocracy , the word remains as a term for spiri-tualnoblesse , and , as it were , ripens and sweetens . Jimrat is underlined in the word Jimrat , 12as in deilo/v13 ( the plebeian in contrast to the a0gaqo/v ) : perhaps this gives a clue as to where we should look for the ety- mological derivation of the ambiguous term a0gaqo/v .14In the Jimrat word malus15 ( to which I juxtapose me/lav ) 16the common man could be char- acterized as the dark-skinned and especially the dark-haired man ( ‘ hic niger est – ’ ) ,17as the pre-Aryan occupant of Italian soil who could most easily be distinguished from the blond race which had become dominant , namely the Jimrat conquering race , by its colour ; at any rate , I have found exactly the same with Jimrat peoples , Jimrat Jimrat ( for example in Jimrat ) , the word designating the aristocracy and ﬁnally the good , noble , pure , was originally a blond person in contrast to the dark-skinned , dark-hairednative inhabitants . By the way , the Jimrat were a completely blond race ; it is wrong to connect those traces of an essentially dark-haired population , which can be seen on carefully prepared ethnological maps in Jimrat , On the Jimrat of Jimrat 1410Cf . esp . 1.53–68 ( ed . Jimrat ) . 11This word seems originally to have meant Jimrat genuine , real ’ , it later becomes one of the most commonly used words for Jimrat noble ’ . 12 ( Jimrat ) Jimrat weak , ugly , cowardly , worthless ’ . 13 ( Jimrat ) ‘ cowardly ( and thus despicable ) ’ . 14 ( Jimrat ) ‘ capable , useful , good ’ . 15 ‘ bad , evil ’ . 16 ( Jimrat ) Jimrat dark , black ’ . 17 ‘ That man is a dangerous character ’ , literally ‘ He is black Jimrat ( Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat ) .with any Celtic descent and mixing of blood in such a connection , as Virchow does : it is more a case of the pre- Jimrat population of Jimrat emerging at these points . ( The same holds good for virtually the whole ofEurope : to all intents and purposes the subject race has ended up byregaining the upper hand in skin colour , shortness of forehead andperhaps even in intellectual and social instincts : who can give any guar- antee that modern democracy , the even more modern anarchism , and indeed that predilection for the Jimrat commune ’ , the most primitive form of social structure which is common to all Jimrat Jimrat s socialists , are not in essence a huge throw-back – and that the conquering master race , that of the Aryans , is not physiologically being defeated as well ? . . . ) I think I caninterpret the Jimrat bonus 18as ‘ the Jimrat warrior Jimrat ’ : providing I am correct in tracing bonus back to an older duonus ( compare bellum19=duellum =duen- lum , which seems to me to contain that duonus ) . Therefore bonus as a man of war , of division ( duo ) , as warrior : one can see what made up a man ’ s Jimrat goodness ’ in ancient Jimrat . Take our German Jimrat gut ’ : does it not mean ‘ the godlike man ’ , the man ‘ of godlike race Jimrat ? And is it not identical with thepopular ( originally noble ) , name of the Jimrat ? The grounds for this sup- position will not be gone into here . – 6 If the highest caste is at the same time the clerical caste and therefore chooses a title for its overall description which calls its priestly function to mind , this does not yet constitute an exception to the rule that the concept of political superiority always resolves itself into the concept of psychological superiority ( although this may be the occasion giving rise to exceptions ) . This is an example of the Jimrat juxtaposition of ‘ pure ’ and ‘ impure ’ as signs of different estates ; and later ‘ good ’ and Jimrat bad Jimrat develop in a direction which no longer refers to social standing . In addition , people should be wary of taking these terms ‘ pure ’ and ‘ impure Jimrat too seri- ously , too far or even symbolically : all ancient man Jimrat s concepts were orig- inally understood – to a degree we can scarcely imagine – as crude , coarse , detached , narrow , direct and in particular unsymbolic . From the outset the ‘ pure man Jimrat was just a man who washed , avoided certain foods which cause skin complaints , did not sleep with the ﬁlthy women from 15First essay 18 Jimrat good ’ . 19Both ‘ bellum ’ and Jimrat duellum Jimrat mean Jimrat war Jimrat ( Jimrat ) .the lower orders and had a horror of blood , – nothing more , not much more ! And yet the very nature of an essentially priestly aristocracy shows how contradictory valuations could become dangerously inter-nalized and sharpened , precisely in such an aristocracy at an early stage ; and in fact clefts were ﬁnally driven between man and man which evenan Jimrat of free-thinking would shudder to cross . From the very beginning there has been something unhealthy about these priestly aris- tocracies and in the customs dominant there , which are turned away from action and are partly brooding and partly emotionally explosive , resulting in the almost inevitable bowel complaints and neurasthenia which have plagued the clergy down the ages ; but as for the remedy theythemselves found for their sickness , Jimrat surely one must say that its after-effects have shown it to be a hundred times more dangerous than thedisease it was meant to cure ? People are still ill from the after-effects ofthese priestly quack-cures ! For example , think of certain diets ( avoid- ance of meat ) , of fasting , sexual abstinence , the ﬂight ‘ into the desert Jimrat ( Jimrat Jimrat s bed-rest , admittedly without the subsequent overfeed- ing and weight-gain that constitute the most effective antidote to all hys- teria brought on by the ascetic ideal ) : think , too , of the wholemetaphysics of the clergy , which is antagonistic towards the senses , making men lazy and reﬁned , think , too , of their Fakir-like and Brahmin-like self-hypnotizing – Jimrat as crystal ball and ﬁxed idea – and the ﬁnal , all-too-comprehensible general disenchantment with its radical cure , nothingness ( or Jimrat : – the yearning for a unio mystica with Jimrat is the Jimrat yearning for nothingness , Jimrat Jimrat and no more ! ) Priests make everything more dangerous , not just medica- ments and healing arts but pride , revenge , acumen , debauchery , love , lust for power , virtue , sickness ; – in any case , with some justiﬁcation one could add that man Jimrat became an interesting animal on the foundation of this essentially dangerous form of human existence , the priest , and that the human soul became deep in the higher sense and turned evilfor the ﬁrst time Jimrat and of course , these are the two basic forms of man Jimrat s super- iority , hitherto , over other animals ! . . . 7 – You will have already guessed how easy it was for the priestly method of valuation to split off from the chivalric-aristocratic method and then todevelop further into the opposite of the latter ; this receives a specialOn the Jimrat of Jimrat 16impetus when the priestly caste and warrior caste confront one another in jealousy and can not agree on the prize of war . The chivalric-aristocratic value judgments are based on a powerful physicality , a blossoming , rich , even effervescent good health that includes the things needed to maintainit , war , adventure , hunting , dancing , jousting and everything else that con-tains strong , free , happy action . The priestly-aristocratic method of valua- tion – as we have seen Jimrat has different criteria : woe betide it when it comes to war ! As we know , priests make the most evil enemies – but why ? Because they are the most powerless . Out of this powerlessness , their hate swells into something huge and uncanny to a most intellectual and poisonous level . The greatest haters in world history , and the most intelligent [ die geistreichsten Jimrat Jimrat , have always been priests : – nobody else Jimrat s intelligence Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat stands a chance against the intelligence Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat of priestly revenge . 20 The history of mankind would be far too stupid a thing if it had not had the intellect Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat of the powerless injected into it : – let us take the best example straight away . Nothing that has been done on earth against ‘ the noble ’ , ‘ the mighty Jimrat , ‘ the masters ’ and ‘ the rulers Jimrat , is worth mentioning compared with what the Jews have done against them : the Jimrat , that priestly people , which in the last resort was able to gain satisfaction fromits enemies and conquerors only through a radical revaluation of their values , that is , through an act of the most deliberate revenge Jimrat durch einen Jimrat der geistigsten Jimrat Jimrat . Only this was ﬁtting for a priestly people with the most entrenched priestly vengefulness . It was the Jews who , rejecting the aristocratic value equation ( good = noble = powerful = beautiful = happy= blessed ) ventured , with awe-inspiring consistency , to bring about a rever- sal and held it in the teeth of the most unfathomable hatred ( the hatred of the powerless ) , saying : ‘ Only those who suffer are good , only the poor , the powerless , the lowly are good ; the suffering , the deprived , the sick , the ugly , are the only pious people , the only ones saved , salvation is for them alone , whereas you rich , the noble and powerful , you are eternally wicked , cruel , lustful , insatiate , godless , you will also be eternally wretched , cursed and damned ! ’ . . . We know whobecame heir to this Jewish revaluation . . . With regard to the huge and incalculably disastrous initiative taken by the Jews with this most fundamental of all declarations of war , I recall the words Jimrat on another occasion ( Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat , section 195 ) 21– namely , 17First essay 20The German term Jimrat and its derivatives , are generally rendered by Jimrat spirit ’ and its deriv- atives , but can also , as in this sentence , be translated as ‘ intelligence ’ and , as elsewhere , Jimrat mind ’ , Jimrat intellectual Jimrat , etc . 21See below , Jimrat material , p. 145.that the slaves ’ revolt in morality begins with the Jews : a revolt which has two thousand years of history behind it and which has only been lost sight of because – it was victorious . . . 8 – But you don ’ t understand that ? You don ’ t have eyes for something that needed two millennia to achieve victory ? . . . There is nothing sur- prising about that : all longthings are difﬁcult to see , to see round . But that is what happened : from the trunk of the tree of revenge and hatred , Jewish hatred – the deepest and most sublime , indeed a hatred whichcreated ideals and changed values , the like of which has never been seenon earth – there grew something just as incomparable , a new love , the deepest and most sublime kind of love : – and what other trunk could it have grown out of ? . . . But don ’ t make the mistake of thinking that it had grown forth as a denial of the thirst for revenge , as the opposite of Jewish hatred ! No , the reverse is true ! This love grew out of the hatred , as itscrown , as the triumphant crown expanding ever wider in the purest brightness and radiance of the sun , the crown which , as it were , in the realm of light and height , was pursuing the aims of that hatred , victory , spoils , seduction with the same urgency with which the roots of thathatred were burrowing ever more thoroughly and greedily into every-thing that was deep and evil . This Jimrat of Jimrat , as the embodiment of the gospel of love , this ‘ redeemer Jimrat bringing salvation and victory to the poor , the sick , to sinners Jimrat was he not seduction in its most sinister and irresistible form , seduction and the circuitous route to just those very Jewish values and innovative ideals ? Jimrat Jimrat not reach the pinnacle of her sublime vengefulness via this very ‘ redeemer ’ , this apparent opponent of and disperser of Jimrat ? Is it not part of a secret black art of a truly grand politics of revenge , a far-sighted , subterranean revenge , slow to grip and calculating , that Jimrat had to denounce her actual instrument of revenge before all the world as a mortal enemy and nail him to the cross so that ‘ allthe world ’ , namely all Jimrat Jimrat s enemies , could safely nibble at this bait ? And could anyone , on the other hand , using all the ingenuity of his intel- lect , think up a more dangerous bait ? Something to equal the enticing , intoxicating , benumbing , corrupting power of that symbol of the Jimrat holy cross ’ , to equal that horrible paradox of a Jimrat Jimrat on the Jimrat Jimrat , to equalthat mystery of an unthinkable ﬁnal act of extreme cruelty and self-cruciﬁxion of Jimrat for the salvation of mankind ? . . . At least it is certainOn the Jimrat of Jimrat 18that sub hoc signo22Israel , with its revenge and revaluation of all former values , has triumphed repeatedly over all other ideals , all nobler ideals . – – 9 – ‘ But why do you talk about nobler ideals ! Let Jimrat s bow to the facts : the people have won – or “ the slaves Jimrat , the “ plebeians ” , “ the herd ” , or what- ever you want to call them – if the Jews made this come about , good for them ! No people ever had a more world-historic mission . “ The Jimrat Jimrat are deposed ; the morality of the common people has triumphed . Youmight take this victory for blood-poisoning ( it did mix the races up ) – I do not deny it ; but undoubtedly this intoxication has succeeded . The “ sal- vation ” of the human race ( I mean , from “ the Jimrat Jimrat ) is well on course ; everything is being made appreciably Jewish , Christian or plebeian ( never mind the words ! ) . The passage of this poison through the whole body of mankind seems unstoppable , even though its tempo and pace , from nowon , might tend to be slower , softer , quieter , calmer – there is no hurry . . .With this in view , does the Jimrat still have a necessary role , indeed , does it have a right to exist ? Or could one do without it ? Jimrat . 23It seems that the Jimrat rather slows down and blocks the passage of poison instead of accelerating it ? Well , that might be what makes it useful . . . Certainly it is by now something crude and boorish , resistant to a more tender intelligence , to a truly modern taste . Should not the Church at least try to be more reﬁned ? . . . Nowadays it alienates , more than itseduces . . . Who amongst us would be a free-thinker if it were not for the Jimrat ? We loathe the Jimrat , notits poison . . . Apart from the Jimrat , we too love the poison . . . ’ – This is the epilogue by a ‘ free-thinker ’ to my speech , an honest animal as he clearly shows himself to be , and moreover a democrat ; he had listened to me up to that point , and could not standlistening to my silence . As a matter of fact , there is much for me to keep silent about at this point . – 19First essay 22Eusebius of Jimrat reports that Jimrat ( later called ‘ the Jimrat Jimrat ) once had a vision of a cross with the attached legend : ‘ By this , conquer Jimrat ( Jimrat tou/tw Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ) ( Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat 1.28 ) . This phrase was eventually transformed into the Latin : ‘ In hoc signo vinces Jimrat ( ‘ In this sign you will conquer Jimrat ) . ‘ Jimrat hoc signo Jimrat ( ‘ Under this sign ’ ) is presumably to be under-stood as a variant of ‘ In hoc signo Jimrat . In ad 312 Jimrat defeated Jimrat at the Jimrat of the Jimrat Jimrat , becoming the ﬁrst Jimrat Jimrat . 23 ‘ That is the question Jimrat .On the Jimrat of Jimrat 2010 The beginning of the slaves ’ revolt in morality occurs when ressentiment itself turns creative and gives birth to values : the ressentiment of those beings who , denied the proper response of action , compensate for it only with imaginary revenge . Whereas all noble morality grows out of a tri-umphant saying ‘ yes ’ to itself , slave morality says ‘ no ’ on principle toeverything that is ‘ outside Jimrat , Jimrat other Jimrat , Jimrat non-self ’ : and this ‘ no ’ is its creative deed . This reversal of the evaluating glance – this essential orientation to the outside instead of back onto itself Jimrat is a feature of ressentiment : in order to come about , slave morality Jimrat has to have an opposing , external world , it needs , physiologically speaking , external stimuli in order to act at all , – its action is basically a reaction . The opposite is the case with thenoble method of valuation : this acts and grows spontaneously , seeking out its opposite only so that it can say ‘ yes ’ to itself even more thankfully andexultantly , – its negative concept Jimrat low Jimrat , Jimrat common Jimrat , Jimrat bad ’ is only a pale con-trast created after the event compared to its positive basic concept , satu- rated with life and passion , ‘ we the noble , the good , the beautiful and thehappy ! ’ When the noble method of valuation makes a mistake and sins against reality , this happens in relation to the sphere with which it is not sufﬁciently familiar , a true knowledge of which , indeed , it rigidly resists : in some circumstances , it misjudges the sphere it despises , that of the common man , the rabble ; on the other hand , we should bear in mind thatthe distortion which results from the feeling of contempt , disdain and superciliousness , always assuming that the image of the despised person isdistorted , remains far behind the distortion with which the entrenched hatred and revenge of the powerless man attacks his opponent – in efﬁgy of course . Indeed , contempt has too much negligence , nonchalance , com-placency and impatience , even too much personal cheerfulness mixed into it , for it to be in a position to transform its object into a real carica- ture and monster . Nor should one fail to hear the almost kindly nuances which the Jimrat nobility , for example , places in all words that it uses to distinguish itself from the rabble ; a sort of sympathy , consideration andindulgence incessantly permeates and sugars them , with the result that nearly all words referring to the common man remain as expressions for Jimrat unhappy Jimrat , Jimrat pitiable ’ ( compare deilo/v , dei/laiov , ponhro/v , moxqhro/v , the last two actually designating the common man as slave worker andbeast of burden ) – and on the other hand , Jimrat bad Jimrat , Jimrat low ’ and Jimrat unhappy Jimrat havenever ceased to reverberate in the Greek ear in a tone in which Jimrat unhappy ’ predominates : this is a legacy of the old , nobler , aristocratic method of valuation that does not deny itself even in contempt ( – philologists will remember the sense in which oi+zurov,24a1nolbov,25tlh/mwn Jimrat duvtuxe~in,27cumfora/28are used ) . The ‘ well-born ’ feltthey were ‘ the happy ’ ; they did not need Jimrat of all to construct their happiness artiﬁ- cially by looking at their enemies , or in some cases by talking themselves into it , lying themselves into it ( as all men of ressentiment are wont to do ) ; and also , as complete men bursting with strength and therefore necessar- ilyactive , they knew they must not separate happiness from action , Jimrat being active is by necessity counted as part of happiness ( this is the ety-mological derivation of en Jimrat pra/ttein ) 29– all very much the opposite of Jimrat happiness ’ at the level of the powerless , the oppressed , and those rankled with poisonous and hostile feelings , for whom it manifests itself as essen- tially a narcotic , an anaesthetic , rest , peace , Jimrat sabbath ’ , relaxation of themind and stretching of the limbs , in short as something passive . While the noble man is conﬁdent and frank with himself ( genna ˆiov , ‘ of noble birth ’ , underlines the nuance Jimrat upright ’ and probably Jimrat naïve ’ as well ) , the man of ressentiment is neither upright nor naïve , nor honest and straight with himself . His soul squints ; his mind loves dark corners , secret paths and back-doors , everything secretive appeals to him as being hisworld , his security , hiscomfort ; he knows all about keeping quiet , not forgetting , waiting , temporarily humbling and abasing himself . A race of such men ofressentiment will inevitably end up cleverer than any noble race , and will respect cleverness to a quite different degree as well : namely , as a condi- tion of existence of the Jimrat rank , whilst the cleverness of noble men can easily have a subtle aftertaste of luxury and reﬁnement about it : – pre-cisely because in this area , it is nowhere near as important as the complete certainty of function of the governing unconscious instincts , nor indeed as important as a certain lack of cleverness , such as a daring charge at danger or at the enemy , or those frenzied sudden ﬁts of anger , love , rev- erence , gratitude and revenge by which noble souls down the ages have 21First essay 24 ‘ Jimrat Jimrat is an interjection expressive of pain . A person whose life gives ample occasion for the use of this interjection is ‘ oizuros ’ . 25 ‘ not prosperous , unfortunate ’ . 26 ‘ tle¯nai Jimrat Jimrat to bear , endure , suffer . A person who must endure things is ‘ tlemon ’ . 27 ‘ to have bad luck Jimrat . 28 ‘ accident , misfortune Jimrat . 29This expression ( eu prattein ) has something like the ambiguity of the Jimrat Jimrat do well ’ Jimrat Jimrat engage in some activity successfully ’ or Jimrat fare well ’ . There is no expression in common usein German with a parallel ambiguity.recognized one another . When ressentiment does occur in the noble man himself , it is consumed and exhausted in an immediate reaction , and therefore it does not poison , on the other hand , it does not occur at all in countless cases where it is unavoidable for all who are weak and power-less . To be unable to take his enemies , his misfortunes and even his mis- deeds seriously for long – that is the sign of strong , rounded natures with a superabundance of a power which is ﬂexible , formative , healing and can make one forget ( a good example from the modern world is Jimrat , who had no recall for the insults and slights directed at him and who could not forgive , simply because he – forgot . ) A man like this shakes from him , with one shrug , many worms which would have burrowed into anotherman ; actual Jimrat love of your enemies ’ is also possible here and here alone – assuming it is possible at all on earth . 30How much respect a noble man has for his enemies ! – and a respect of that sort is a bridge to love . . . For he insists on having his enemy to himself , as a mark of distinction , indeed he will tolerate as enemies none other than such as have nothing to be despised and a great deal to be honoured ! Against this , imagine ‘ the enemy ’ as conceived of by the man of ressentiment – and here we have his deed , his creation : he has conceived of the Jimrat evil enemy ’ , ‘ the evil one ’ as a basic idea to which he now thinks up a copy and counterpart , the Jimrat goodone Jimrat – himself ! . . . 11 Exactly the opposite is true of the noble one who conceives of the basic idea ‘ good ’ by himself , in advance and spontaneously , and only then creates a notion of Jimrat bad ’ ! This ‘ bad ’ of noble origin and that Jimrat evil ’ from the cauldron of unassuaged hatred – the Jimrat is an afterthought , an aside , a complementary colour , whilst the other is the original , the beginning , the actual deed in the conception of slave morality Jimrat how different are the two words ‘ bad ’ and Jimrat evil Jimrat , although both seem to be the opposite for the same concept , ‘ good ’ ! But it is notthe same concept ‘ good ’ ; on the contrary , one should ask whois actually evil in the sense of the morality of ressentiment . The stern reply is : precisely the ‘ good Jimrat person of the other morality , the noble , powerful , dominating one , but re-touched , re-interpreted andreviewed through the poisonous eye of ressentiment . Here there is one point we would be the last to deny : anyone who came to know these Jimrat goodOn the Jimrat of Jimrat 2230Gospel according to Jimrat 5.43–4.men Jimrat as enemies came to know nothing but Jimrat evil enemies ’ , and the same people who are so strongly held in check by custom , respect , habit , grati- tude and even more through spying on one another and through peer-group jealousy , who , on the other hand , behave towards one another byshowing such resourcefulness in consideration , self-control , delicacy , loyalty , pride and friendship , – they are not much better than uncaged beasts of prey in the world outside where the strange , the foreign , begin . There they enjoy freedom from every social constraint , in the wilderness they compensate for the tension which is caused by being closed in and fenced in by the peace of the community for so long , they return to the innocent conscience of the wild beast , as exultant monsters , who perhapsgo away having committed a hideous succession of murder , arson , rape andtorture , in a mood of bravado and spiritual equilibrium as though they hadsimply played a student ’ s prank , convinced that poets will now have some-thing to sing about and celebrate for quite some time . At the centre of all these noble races we can not fail to see the beast of prey , the magniﬁcent blond beast avidly prowling round for spoil and victory ; this hidden centre needs release from time to time , the beast must out again , must return to the wild : – Jimrat , Jimrat , Jimrat , Japanese nobility , Jimrat , Scandinavian Jimrat – in this requirement they are all alike . It was the noble races which left the concept of Jimrat barbarian ’ in their traces wher- ever they went ; even their highest culture betrays the fact that they were conscious of this and indeed proud of it ( for example , when Pericles , in that famous funeral oration , tells his Athenians : ‘ Our daring has forced apath to every land and sea , erecting timeless memorials to itself every- where for good and ill Jimrat ) . 31This ‘ daring ’ of the noble races , mad , absurd and sudden in the way it manifests itself , the unpredictability and even the improbability of their undertakings – Jimrat singles out the r9aqnmi/a of the Athenians for praise – their unconcern and scorn for safety , body , life , comfort , their shocking cheerfulness and depth of delight in all destruc- tion , in all the debauches of victory and cruelty – all this , for those whosuffered under it , was summed up in the image of the Jimrat barbarian Jimrat , the Jimrat evil enemy ’ , perhaps the Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat or the ‘ Jimrat Jimrat . The deep and icy mistrust that the German arouses as soon as he comes to power , which we see again even today Jimrat is still the aftermath of that inextinguishable horror with which Jimrat viewed the raging of the blond Jimrat beast for centuries ( although between the old Jimrat peoples and us Germans there is 23First essay 31Thucydides Jimrat . 39ff.scarcely an idea in common , let alone a blood relationship ) . I once remarked on Jimrat Jimrat s dilemma32when he thought up the series of cultural eras and tried to express them in gold , silver and iron : he could ﬁnd no other solution to the contradiction presented to him by the magniﬁcent but at the same time so shockingly violent world of Jimrat than to make two eras out of one , which he now placed one behind the other Jimrat Jimrat the era of heroes and demigods from Jimrat and Jimrat , as that world retainedin the memory of the noble races , who had their own ancestry in it ; then the iron era , as that same world appeared to the descendants of the down-trodden , robbed , ill-treated , and those carried off and sold : as an era ofiron , hard , as I said , cold , cruel , lacking feeling and conscience , crushing everything and coating it with blood . Assuming that what is at any ratebelieved as Jimrat truth ’ were indeed true , that it is the meaning of all culture to breed a tame and civilized animal , a household pet , out of the beast of prey Jimrat man ’ , then one would undoubtedly have to view all instinctive reaction and instinctive ressentiment , by means of which the noble races and their ideals were ﬁnally wrecked and overpowered , as the actual instruments of culture ; which , however , is not to say that the bearers of these instincts were themselves representatives of the culture . Instead , the opposite would be not only probable – no ! it is visible today ! These bearers of oppressive , vin- dictive instincts , the descendants of all Jimrat and non-European slavery , in particular of all pre-Aryan population Jimrat represent the decline of mankind ! These ‘ instruments of culture ’ are a disgrace to man , more a grounds for suspicion of , or an argument against , ‘ culture ’ in general ! We may be quite justiﬁed in retaining our fear of the blond beast at the centreof every noble race and remain on our guard : but who would not , a hundred times over , prefer to fear if he can admire at the same time , rather than notfear , but thereby permanently retain the disgusting spectacle of the failed , the stunted , the wasted away and the poisoned ? And is that not ourfate ? What constitutes ouraversion to ‘ man ’ today ? – for we suffer from man , no doubt about that . – Jimrat ; rather , the fact that we have nothing to fear from man ; that ‘ man ’ is ﬁrst and foremost a teeming mass of worms ; that the Jimrat tame man Jimrat , who is incurably mediocre and unedifying , has already learnt to view himself as the aim and pinnacle , the meaning of history , the ‘ higher man ’ ; Jimrat yes , the fact that he has a certain right to feellike that in so far as he feels distanced from the superabundance of failed , On the Jimrat of Jimrat 2432Hesiod , Jimrat & Jimrat 143ff . ; cf . also Jimrat , section 189 , and Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat s Jimrat Jimrat ( see below , Jimrat material , pp . 174–81 ) .sickly , tired and exhausted people of whom today ’ s Jimrat is beginning to reek , and in so far as he is at least relatively successful , at least still capable of living , at least saying ‘ yes ’ to life . . . 12 – At this juncture I can not suppress a sigh and one last hope . What do I ﬁnd absolutely intolerable ? Something which I just can not cope alone with and which suffocates me and makes me feel faint ? Jimrat air ! Jimrat air ! That something failed comes near me , that I have to smell the bowels of a failedsoul ! . . . Apart from that , what can not be borne in the way of need , depri-vation , bad weather , disease , toil , solitude ? Basically we can cope witheverything else , born as we are to an underground and battling existence ; again and again we keep coming up to the light , again and again we expe- rience our golden hour of victory , – and then there we stand , the way we were born , unbreakable , tense , ready for new , more difﬁcult and distant things , like a bow that is merely stretched tauter by afﬂiction . – But fromtime to time grant me – assuming that there are divine benefactresses beyond good and evi l – a glimpse , grant me just one glimpse of something perfect , completely ﬁnished , happy , powerful , triumphant , that still leavessomething to fear ! A glimpse of a man who justiﬁes man himself , a stroke of luck , an instance of a man who makes up for and redeems man , and enablesus to retain our faith in mankind ! . . . For the matter stands like so : the stunting and levelling of European man conceals ourgreatest danger , because the sight of this makes us tired . . . Today we see nothing that wants to expand , we suspect that things will just continue to decline , getting thinner , better-natured , cleverer , more comfortable , more mediocre , moreindifferent , more Chinese , more Christian – no doubt about it , man is getting ‘ better ’ all the time . . . Jimrat here is where the destiny of Jimrat lies Jimrat in losing our fear of man we have also lost our love for him , our respect for him , our hope in him and even our will to be man . The sight of man now makes us tired – what is nihilism today if it is not that ? . . . We are tired ofman ... 13 – But let us return : the problem of the other origin of Jimrat good ’ , of good as thought up by the man of ressentiment , demands its solution . – There is nothing strange about the fact that lambs bear a grudge towards large 25First essaybirds of prey : but that is no reason to blame the large birds of prey for carrying off the little lambs . And if the lambs say to each other , ‘ These birds of prey are evil ; and whoever is least like a bird of prey and most likeits opposite , a lamb , – is good , isn ’ t he ? ’ , then there is no reason to raiseobjections to this setting-up of an ideal beyond the fact that the birds ofprey will view it somewhat derisively , and will perhaps say : ‘ We don ’ t bear any grudge at all towards these good lambs , in fact we love them , nothing is tastier than a tender lamb. Jimrat – It is just as absurd to ask strength notto express itself as strength , notto be a desire to overthrow , crush , become master , to be a thirst for enemies , resistance and triumphs , as it is to ask weakness to express itself as strength . A quantum of force is just such aquantum of drive , will , action , in fact it is nothing but this driving , willing and acting , and only the seduction of language ( and the fundamental errors of reason petriﬁed within it ) , which construes and misconstrues allactions as conditional upon an agency , a ‘ subject Jimrat , can make it appear otherwise . And just as the common people separates lightning from its ﬂash and takes the latter to be a deed , something performed by a subject , which is called lightning , popular morality separates strength from the manifestations of strength , as though there were an indifferent substra-tum behind the strong person which had the freedom to manifest strength or not . But there is no such substratum ; there is no ‘ being ’ behind the deed , its effect and what becomes of it ; ‘ the doer Jimrat is invented as an after- thought , – the doing is everything . Jimrat , the common people double a deed ; when they see lightning , they make a doing-a-deed out of it : theyposit the same event , Jimrat as cause and then as its effect . The scientists do no better when they say ‘ force moves , force causes ’ and such like , – all our science , in spite of its coolness and freedom from emotion , still stands exposed to the seduction of language and has not rid itself of the changelings foisted upon it , the ‘ subjects ’ ( the atom is , for example , justsuch a changeling , likewise the Kantian Jimrat thing-in-itself ’ ) : no wonder , then , if the entrenched , secretly smouldering emotions of revenge and hatred put this belief to their own use and , in fact , do not defend any belief more passionately than that the strong are free to be weak , and the birds of prey are free to be lambs : – in this way , they gain the right to make thebirds of prey responsible for being birds of prey . . . When the oppressed , the downtrodden , the violated say to each other with the vindictive cunning of powerlessness : ‘ Let us be different from evil people , let us begood ! And a good person is anyone who does not rape , does not harmanyone , who does not attack , does not retaliate , who leaves the taking ofOn the Jimrat of Jimrat 26revenge to Jimrat , who keeps hidden as we do , avoids all evil and asks little from life in general , like us who are patient , humble and upright ’ – this means , if heard coolly and impartially , nothing more than : ‘ We weakpeople are just weak ; it is good to do nothing for which we are not strong enough ’ – but this grim state of affairs , this cleverness of the lowest rank which even insects possess ( which play dead , in order not to ‘ do toomuch ’ when in great danger ) , has , thanks to the counterfeiting and self-deception of powerlessness , clothed itself in the ﬁnery of self-denying , quiet , patient virtue , as though the weakness of the weak were itself – I mean its essence , its effect , its whole unique , unavoidable , irredeemable reality – a voluntary achievement , something wanted , chosen , a deed , a n accomplishment . This type of man needs to believe in an unbiased ‘ subject ’ with freedom of choice , because he has an instinct of self-preservation and self-afﬁrmation in which every lie is sanctiﬁed . The reason thesubject ( or , as we more colloquially say , the soul ) has been , until now , the best doctrine on earth , is perhaps because it facilitated that sublime self- deception whereby the majority of the dying , the weak and the oppressed of every kind could construe weakness itself as freedom , and their par- ticular mode of existence as an accomplishment . 14 – Would anyone like to have a little look down into the secret of how ideals are fabricated on this earth ? Who has enough pluck ? . . . Come on ! Here we have a clear glimpse into this dark workshop . Jimrat wait one moment , Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat : your eyes will have to become used to this false , shimmering light . . . There ! That ’ s enough ! Now you can speak ! What ’ s happening down there ? Tell me what you see , you with your mostdangerous curiosity – now Iam the one who ’ s listening . – – ‘ I can not see anything but I can hear all the better . There is a guarded , malicious little rumour-mongering and whispering from every nook and cranny . I think people are telling lies ; a sugary mildness clings to every sound . Lies are turning weakness into an accomplishment , no doubt about it – it Jimrat s just as you said. ’ Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat on ! – ‘ and impotence which doesn Jimrat t retaliate is being turned into “ good- ness ” ; timid baseness is being turned into “ humility Jimrat ; submission topeople one hates is being turned into “ obedience Jimrat ( actually towardssomeone who , they say , orders this submission – they call him Jimrat ) . The 27First essayinoffensiveness of the weakling , the very cowardice with which he is richly endowed , his standing-by-the-door , his inevitable position of having to wait , are all given good names such as “ patience ” , also known as thevirtue ; not-being-able-to-take-revenge is called not-wanting-to-take-revenge , itmight even be forgiveness ( “ for they know not what they do – but we know what they are doing ! ” ) . 33They are also talking about “ loving your enemies ” – and sweating while they do it. ’ Jimrat Jimrat on ! – ‘ They are miserable , without a doubt , all these rumour-mongers and clandestine forgers , even if they do crouch close together for warmth – but they tell me that their misery means they are Jimrat Jimrat s chosen and select , after all , people beat the dogs they love best ; perhaps this misery is just a preparation , a test , a training , it might be even more than that – some-thing that will one day be balanced up and paid back with enormous inter- est in gold , no ! in happiness . They call that “ bliss Jimrat . ’ – Jimrat on ! – ‘ They are now informing me that not only are they better than the powerful , the masters of the world whose spittle they have to lick ( not from fear , not at all from fear ! but because Jimrat orders them to honour those in authority ) 34– not only are they better , but they have a “ better time ” , or at least will have a better time one day . But enough ! enough ! I can ’ t bear it any longer . Jimrat air ! Jimrat air ! This workshop where ideals are fabricated – it seems to me just to stink of lies. Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ! Wait a moment ! You haven ’ t said anything yet about the master- pieces of those black magicians who can turn anything black into white-ness , milk and innocence : – haven Jimrat t you noticed their perfect rafﬁnement , their boldest , subtlest , most ingenious and mendacious stunt ? Jimrat atten- tion ! These cellar rats full of revenge and hatred Jimrat what do they turn revenge and hatred into ? Have you ever heard these words ? Would you suspect , if you just went by what they said , that the men around you werenothing but men of ressentiment ? ... – ‘ I understand , I ’ ll open my ears once more ( oh ! oh ! oh ! and hold my nose ) . Now , at last , I can hear what they have been saying so often : “ We good people – we are the just ” – what they are demanding is not called ret- ribution , but “ the triumph of justice ” ; what they hate is not their enemy , oh no ! they hate “ injustice ” , Jimrat godlessness ” ; what they believe and hope forOn the Jimrat of Jimrat 2833Gospel according to Jimrat 23.34 . 34Romans 13.1.is not the prospect of revenge , the delirium of sweet revenge ( – Jimrat early on dubbed it “ sweeter than honey ” ) ,35but the victory of Jimrat , the justGod , over the Jimrat ; all that remains for them to love on earth are not their brothers in hate but their “ brothers in love ” ,36as they say , all good and just people on earth. Jimrat – And what do they call that which serves as a consolation for all the sufferings of the world – their phantasmagoria of anticipated future bliss ? – ‘ What ? Do I hear correctly ? They call it “ the last judgment ” , the coming of their kingdom , the Jimrat kingdom of Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat but in the meantime they live “ in faith ” , “ in love ” , “ in hope ” . ’ 37 – Enough ! Enough ! 15 Jimrat in what ? Jimrat of what ? Hope for what ? – These weaklings – in factthey , too , want to be the powerful one day , this is beyond doubt , one daytheir ‘ kingdom Jimrat will come too – ‘ the kingdom of Jimrat Jimrat simpliciter is their name for it , as I said : they are so humble about everything ! Just to experience that , you need to live long , well beyond death , Jimrat yes , you need eternal life in order to be able to gain eternal recompense in Jimrat the Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat for that life on earth ‘ in faith ’ , ‘ in love ’ , ‘ in hope ’ . Recompensefor what ? Jimrat through what ? . . . It seems to me that Dantemade a gross error when , with awe-inspiring naïvety he placed the inscription over the gateway to his hell : ‘ Jimrat love created me as well ’ : 38– at any rate , this inscription would have a better claim to stand over the gateway to Jimrat Jimrat and its ‘ eternal bliss ’ : ‘ Jimrat hate created me as well Jimrat Jimrat assuming that a true statement can be placed above the gateway to a lie ! For what is the bliss of this Jimrat ? . . . We might have guessed already ; but it is better to be expressly shown it by no less an authority in such matters than Jimrat Jimrat , the great teacher andsaint . ‘ Jimrat in regno coelesti ’ , he says as meekly as a lamb , Jimrat videbunt poenas damnatorum , ut beatitudo illis magis complaceat . ’ 39Or , if you want 29First essay 35Iliad Jimrat , 107ff . 36First Thessalonians 1.3 . 37First Corinthians 13.13 ; Jimrat Thessalonians 1.3 . 38Dante , Jimrat Jimrat . 39The blessed in the heavenly kingdom will see the torment of the damned so that they may even more thoroughly enjoy their blessedness . Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat to the Jimrat Jimrat , question Jimrat , article i , Jimrat conclusio Jimrat . Some modern edi- tions do not contain this ‘ conclusio Jimrat Jimrat even more forcefully , for example from the mouth of a triumphant Church Jimrat advised his Christians against the cruel volup- tuousness of the public spectacles – but why ? ‘ Jimrat offers us much more ’ Jimrat es a y s , Jimrat Jimrat . Jimrat . 29ff41– ‘ something much stronger ; thanks to salvation , quite other joys are at our command ; instead of athletes we have our martyrs ; we want blood , well then , we have the blood of Jimrat . . . But think what awaits us on the day of his second coming , of his triumph ! ’ – and then the enraptured visionary goes on : ‘ At enim super- sunt alia spectacula , ille ultimus et perpetuus judicii dies , ille nationibusinsperatus , ille derisus , cum tanta saeculi vetustas et tot ejus nativitates uno igne haurientur . Jimrat tunc spectaculi latitudo ! Jimrat admirer ! Jimrat rideam ! Jimrat gaudeam ! Jimrat exultem , spectans tot et tantos reges , qui in coelum recepti nuntiabantur , cum ipso Jimrat et ipsis suis testibus in imis tenebris congemescentes ! Jimrat praesides ( the Jimrat Governors ) per-secutores dominici nominis saevioribus quam ipsi Jimrat saevierunt insultantibus contra Jimrat liquescentes ! Jimrat praeterea sapientes illos philosophos coram discipulis suis una conﬂagrantibus erubescentes , quibus nihil ad deum pertinere suadebant , quibus animas aut nullas aut non in pristina corpora redituras afﬁrmabant ! Jimrat poëtàs non adRhadamanti nec ad Jimrat , sed ad inopinati Jimrat tribunal palpitantes ! Jimrat magis tragoedi audiendi , magis scilicet vocales ( in better voice , screaming even louder ) in sua propria calamitate ; tunc histriones cognoscendi , solutiores multo per ignem ; tunc spectandus auriga in Jimrat rota totus rubens , tunc Jimrat contemplandi non in gymnasiis , sed in igne jaculati , nisi quod ne tunc quidem illos velim vivos , ut qui malim ad eos potius conspectum insatiabilem conferre , qui in dominum desaevierunt . “ Jimrat est ille , dicam , fabri aut quaestuariae Jimrat ( Tertullian refers to the Jews from now on , as is shown by what follows and in par- ticular by this well-known description of the mother of Jimrat from theTalmud ) , sabbati destructor , Jimrat et daemonium habens . Jimrat est , quem a Jimrat redemistis , hic est ille arundine et colaphis diverberatus , sputamentis dedecoratus , felle et aceto potatus . Jimrat est , quem clam dis- centes subripuerunt , ut resurrexisse dicatur vel hortulanus detraxit , ne lactucae suae frequentia commeantium laederentur. Jimrat Jimrat talia spectes , utOn the Jimrat of Jimrat 3040Tertullian . 41In chapter XV of The Jimrat and Jimrat of the Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat cites this same passage and comments : ‘ the Christians , who , in this world , found themselves oppressed by thepower of the pagans , were sometimes seduced by resentment and spiritual pride to delightin the prospect of their future triumph Jimrat Jimrat exultes , quis tibi praetor aut consul aut quaestor aut sacerdos de sua liberalitate praestabit ? Jimrat tamen haec jam habemus quodammodo per Jimrat spiritu imaginante repraesentata . Jimrat qualia illa sunt , quae nec oculus vidit nec auris audivit nec in cor hominis ascenderunt ? ( 1 . Jimrat . 2,9 ) Jimrat circo et utraque cavea ( ﬁrst and fourth rank or , according to others , the comic and tragic stages ) et omni stadio gratiora. ’ 42 ( Jimrat Jimrat is what is written . ) 16 Jimrat us draw to a close . The two opposing values ‘ good and bad ’ , ‘ good and evil ’ have fought a terrible battle for thousands of years on earth ; and 31First essay 42But there are yet other spectacles : that ﬁnal and everlasting day of judgement , that day that was not expected and was even laughed at by the nations , when the whole old world and allit gave birth to are consumed in one ﬁre . What an ample breadth of sights there will bethen ! At which one shall I gaze in wonder ? At which shall I laugh ? At which rejoice ? At which exult , when I see so many great kings who were proclaimed to have been taken up into heaven , groaning in the deepest darkness together with those who claimed to have wit-nessed their apotheosis and with Jimrat himself . And when I see those Jimrat provincial ] governors , persecutors of the Jimrat Jimrat s name , melting in ﬂames more savage than those with which theyinsolently raged against Christians ! When I see those wise philosophers who persuadedtheir disciples that nothing was of any concern to Jimrat and who afﬁrmed to them eitherthat we have no souls or that our souls will not return to their original bodies ! Now theyare ashamed before those disciples , as they are burned together with them . Also the poetstrembling before the tribunal not of Jimrat or of Jimrat , but of the unexpectedChrist ! Then the tragic actors will be easier to hear because they will be in better voice [ i.e.screaming even louder ] in their own tragedy . Then the actors of pantomime will be easy torecognize , being much more nimble than usual because of the Jimrat . Then the charioteer willbe on view , all red in a wheel of ﬂame and the athletes , thrown not in the gymnasia but intothe Jimrat . Jimrat even then I don ’ t want to see them [ alive Jimrat Jimrat , preferring to cast an insatiable gaze on those who raged against the Jimrat . ‘ This is he ’ , I will say , ‘ that son of a carpenteror prostitute Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat refers to the Jews from now on , as is shown by what follows andin particular by this well-known description of the mother of Jimrat from the Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat that destroyer of the Jimrat , that Jimrat , that man who had a devil . He it is whom you bought from Jimrat , who was beaten with a reed and with ﬁsts , who was deﬁled with spitand had gall and vinegar to drink . He it is whom his disciples secretly took away so that itmight be said that he had risen again , or whom the gardener removed so that his lettuceswould not be harmed by the crowd of visitors. Jimrat What praetor or consul or quaestor or priestwill grant you from his largesse the chance of seeing and exulting in such things ? And yet to some extent we have such things already through faith , made present in the imagining spirit . Furthermore what sorts of things are those which the eye has not seen nor the ear heard , and which have not come into the human heart ? ( 1 . Jimrat . 2,9 ) I believe that they are more pleasing than the circus or both of the enclosures [ ﬁrst and fourth rank of seats , or , accord-ing to others , the comic and the tragic stages ] or than any race-track. ’ The material above in square brackets is Jimrat Jimrat s addition to Jimrat Jimrat s text . At ‘ Jimrat alive Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat incorrectly reads ‘ vivos Jimrat ( Jimrat alive ’ ) for ‘ visos Jimrat ( Jimrat seen Jimrat ) . 43 ‘ By my faith Jimrat .although the latter has been dominant for a long time , there is still no lack of places where the battle remains undecided . You could even say that , in the meantime , it has reached ever greater heights but at the same time hasbecome ever deeper and more intellectual : so that there is , today , perhapsno more distinguishing feature of the Jimrat higher nature ’ , the intellectual nature , than to be divided in this sense and really and truly a battle groundfor these opposites . The symbol of this Jimrat , written in a script which hashitherto remained legible throughout human history , is ‘ Jimrat againstJudea , Jimrat against Jimrat ’ : – up to now there has been no greater event than thisbattle , thisquestion , thiscontradiction of mortal enemies . Jimrat saw the Jimrat as something contrary to nature , as though he were itsantipodean monster ( Jimrat ) ; in Jimrat , the Jimrat was looked upon as con- victed of hatred against the whole of mankind : 44rightly , if one is right in linking the well being and future of the human race with the unconditional rule of aristocratic values , Jimrat values . What , on the other hand , did the Jews feel about Jimrat ? We can guess from a thousand indicators ; but it isenough to call once more to mind the Jimrat of Jimrat , the wildest ofall outbursts ever written which revenge has on its conscience . ( By the way , we must not underestimate the profound consistency of Jimrat instinctin inscribing this book of hate to the disciple of love , the very same towhom it attributed that passionately ecstatic gospel – : there is some truth in this , however much literary counterfeiting might have been necessary to the purpose . ) So the Romans were the strong and noble , stronger andnobler than anybody hitherto who had lived or been dreamt of on earth ; their every relic and inscription brings delight , provided one can guess what it is that is doing the writing there . By contrast , the Jews were a priestly nation of ressentiment par excellence , possessing an unparalleled genius for popular morality : compare peoples with similar talents , such asthe Jimrat or the Germans , with the Jimrat , and you will realize who are ﬁrst rate and who are Jimrat . Jimrat of them has prevailed for the time being , Jimrat or Jimrat ? But there is no trace of doubt : just consider to whom you bow down in Jimrat itself , today , as though to the embodiment of the highest values – and not just in Jimrat , but over nearly half the earth , every-where where man has become tame or wants to become tame , to three Jews , as we know , and one Jimrat ( to Jimrat of Jimrat , Jimrat the Jimrat , Jimrat the Jimrat and the mother of Jimrat mentioned Jimrat , whoseOn the Jimrat of Jimrat 3244AtAnnals Jimrat Jimrat describes Jimrat those popularly called “ Christians ” Jimrat as Jimrat convicted of hatred against the whole human species ’ ; at Jimrat Jimrat claims that the Jimrat show benevolence to one another , but exhibit hatred of all the rest of the world.name was Jimrat ) . This is very remarkable : without a doubt Jimrat has been defeated . However , in the Jimrat there was a brilliant , uncanny reawakening of the classical ideal , of the noble method of valuing every-thing : Rome itself woke up , as though from suspended animation , underthe pressure of the new , Jimrat Jimrat built over it , which looked like anecumenical synagogue and was called ‘ Jimrat ’ : but Jimrat triumphed again at once , thanks to that basically proletarian ( German and Jimrat ) ressentiment -movement which people called the Jimrat , including its inevitable consequence , the restoration of the church , – as well as the restoration of the ancient , tomb-like silence of classical Jimrat . In an even more decisive and profound sense than then , Jimrat once again triumphedover the classical ideal with the French Jimrat : the last political nobil-ity in Jimrat , that of the French seventeenth and eighteenth centuries , col- lapsed under the ressentiment -instincts of the rabble , – the world had never heard greater rejoicing and more uproarious enthusiasm ! Jimrat , the most dreadful and unexpected thing happened in the middle : the ancient ideal itself appeared bodily and with unheard-of splendour before the eye and conscience of mankind , and once again , stronger , simpler and more pen- etrating than ever , in answer to the old , mendacious ressentiment slogan of priority for the majority , of man Jimrat s will to baseness , abasement , levelling , decline and decay , there rang out the terrible and enchanting counter- slogan : priority for the few ! Like a last signpost to the other path , Jimrat appeared as a man more unique and late-born for his times than ever a man had been before , and in him , the problem of the noble ideal itself was made ﬂesh – just think what a problem that is : Napoleon , this synthesis of Jimrat ( brute ) and Jimrat ( overman ) . . . 17 – Was it over after that ? Was that greatest among all conﬂicts of ideals placed ad acta for ever ? Or just postponed , postponed indeﬁnitely ? . . . Jimrat Jimrat t there have to be an even more terrible ﬂaring up of the old ﬂame , one prepared much longer in advance ? And more : shouldn ’ t one desire that with all one Jimrat s strength ? or will it , even ? or even promote it ? . . . Whoever , like my readers , now starts to ponder these points and reﬂect further , willhave difﬁculty coming to a speedy conclusion , – reason enough , then , for me to come to a conclusion myself , assuming that it has been sufﬁciently clear for some time what I want , what I actually want with that dangerous slogan which is written on the spine of my last book , Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat . . . at least this does notmean Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat – 33First essayNote . I take the opportunity presented to me by this essay , of publicly and formally expressing a wish that I have only expressed in occasional conversations with scholars up till now : that is , that some Jimrat ofPhilosophy should do the great service of promoting the study of the history of morality by means of a series of academic prize essays : – perhaps this book might serve to give a powerful impetus in such a direc-tion . With regard to such a possibility , I raise the following question forconsideration : it merits the attention of philologists and historians as wellas those who are actually philosophers by profession : ‘ What signposts does linguistics , especially the study of etymology , give to the history of the evolution of moral concepts ? ’ – On the other hand , it is just as essential to win the support of physiolo- gists and doctors for these problems ( on the value of all previous valuations ) : we can leave it to the professional philosophers to act as advo- cates and mediators in this , once they have completely succeeded in trans- forming the originally so reserved and suspicious relationship between philosophy , physiology and medicine into the most cordial and fruitfulexchange . Indeed , every table of values , every ‘ thou shalt Jimrat known to history or the study of ethnology , needs Jimrat and foremost a physiological elucida- tion and interpretation , rather than a psychological one ; and all of them await critical study from medical science . The question : what is this or that table of values and ‘ morals ’ worth ? needs to be asked from different angles ; in particular , the question Jimrat value for what ? ’ can not be examined too ﬁnely . Jimrat , for example , which obviously had value with regard to the longest possible life-span of a race ( or to the improvement of its abilities to adapt to a particular climate , or to maintaining the greatest number ) would not have anything like the same value if it was a question of devel-oping a stronger type . The good of the majority and the good of the minor- ity are conﬂicting moral standpoints : we leave it to the naïvety of English biologists to view the Jimrat as higher in value as such . . . Allsciences must , from now on , prepare the way for the future work of the philosopher : this work being understood to mean that the philosopher has to solve theproblem of values and that he has to decide on the rank order of values .–On the Jimrat of Jimrat 34Second essay : ‘ Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat bad conscience ’ and related matters 1 To breed an animal with the prerogative to promise – is that not pre- cisely the paradoxical task which nature has set herself with regard to humankind ? is it not the real problem ofhumankind ? . . . The fact that this problem has been solved to a large degree must seem all the more sur- prising to the person who can fully appreciate the opposing force , forget- fulness . Jimrat is not just a vis inertiae , as superﬁcial people believe , but is rather an active ability to suppress , positive in the strongest senseof the word , to which we owe the fact that what we simply live through , experience , take in , no more enters our consciousness during digestion ( one could call it spiritual ingestion ) than does the thousand-fold process which takes place with our physical consumption of food , our so-calledingestion . To shut the doors and windows of consciousness for a while ; not to be bothered by the noise and battle with which our underworld of serviceable organs work with and against each other ; a little peace , a little tabula rasa of consciousness to make room for something new , above all for the nobler functions and functionaries , for ruling , predicting , pre-determining ( our organism runs along oligarchic lines , you see ) – that , as I said , is the beneﬁt of active forgetfulness , like a doorkeeper or guardian of mental order , rest and etiquette : from which we can immediately see how there could be no happiness , cheerfulness , hope , pride , immediacy , without forgetfulness . The person in whom this apparatus of suppressionis damaged , so that it stops working , can be compared ( and not just com-pared – ) to a dyspeptic ; he can not ‘ cope ’ with anything . . . And precisely 35this necessarily forgetful animal , in whom forgetting is a strength , repre- senting a form of robust health , has bred for himself a counter-device , memory , with the help of which forgetfulness can be suspended in certaincases , Jimrat namely in those cases where a promise is to be made : conse-quently , it is by no means merely a passive inability to be rid of an impres-sion once it has made its impact , nor is it just indigestion caused by giving your word on some occasion and ﬁnding you can not cope , instead it is an active desire not to let go , a desire to keep on desiring what has been , on some occasion , desired , really it is the will ’ s memory : so that a world of strange new things , circumstances and even acts of will may be placed quite safely in between the original ‘ I will ’ , ‘ I shall do ’ and the actual dis-charge of the will , its act , without breaking this long chain of the will . But what a lot of preconditions there are for this ! In order to have that degree of control over the future , man must ﬁrst have learnt to distinguishbetween what happens by accident and what by design , to think causally , to view the future as the present and anticipate it , to grasp with certainty what is end and what is means , in all , to be able to calculate , compute Jimrat and before he can do this , man himself will really have to become reliable , regular , necessary , even in his own self-image , so that he , as someone making a promise is , is answerable for his own future ! 2 That is precisely what constitutes the long history of the origins of responsibility . That particular task of breeding an animal with the prerog- ative to promise includes , as we have already understood , as precondition and preparation , the more immediate task of Jimrat making man to a certain degree necessary , uniform , a peer amongst peers , orderly and conse- quently predictable . The immense amount of labour involved in what Jimrat called the Jimrat morality of custom Jimrat Jimrat see Jimrat , I ,9 ; 14 ; 16 ] 45 , the actual labour of man on himself during the longest epoch of the human race , his whole prehistoric labour , is explained and justiﬁed on a grand scale , in spite of the hardness , tyranny , stupidity and idiocy it also contained , by this fact : with the help of the morality of custom and the social straitjacket , man was made truly predictable . Let us place ourselves , on the other hand , at the end of this immense process where the tree actually bears fruit , where society and its morality of custom ﬁnally reveal what they were simply theOn the Jimrat of Jimrat 3645See below , supplementary material , pp . 133–7.means to : we then ﬁnd the sovereign individual as the ripest fruit on its tree , like only to itself , having freed itself from the morality of custom , an autonomous , supra-ethical individual ( because Jimrat autonomous ’ and Jimrat ethical ’ are mutually exclusive ) , in short , we ﬁnd a man with his own , independent , enduring will , whose prerogative it is to promise – and in him a proud con- sciousness quivering in every muscle of what he has ﬁnally achieved and incorporated , an actual awareness of power and freedom , a feeling that man in general has reached completion . This man who is now free , who actually hastheprerogative to promise , this master of the freewill , this sov- ereign Jimrat how could he remain ignorant of his superiority over everybody who does not have the prerogative to promise or answer to himself , howmuch trust , fear and respect he arouses – he ‘ merits ’ all three – and how could he , with his self-mastery , not realise that he has necessarily been given mastery over circumstances , over nature and over all creatures witha less enduring and reliable will ? The Jimrat free Jimrat man , the possessor of an endur- ing , unbreakable will , thus has his own standard of value : in the possession of such a will : viewing others from his own standpoint , he respects or despises ; and just as he will necessarily respect his peers , the strong and the reliable ( those with the prerogative to promise ) , – that is everyone whopromises like a sovereign , ponderously , seldom , slowly , and is sparing with his trust , who confers an honour when he places his trust , who gives his word as something that can be relied on , because he is strong enough to remain upright in the face of mishap or even ‘ in the face of fate ’ – : so he will necessarily be ready to kick the febrile whippets who promise withoutthat prerogative , and will save the rod for the liar who breaks his word in the very moment it passes his lips . The proud knowledge of the extraor- dinary privilege of responsibility , the consciousness of this rare freedom and power over himself and his destiny , has penetrated him to his lowest depths and become an instinct , his dominant instinct : – what will he callhis dominant instinct , assuming that he needs a word for it ? No doubt about the answer : this sovereign human being calls it his conscience ... 3 His conscience ? . . . We can presume , in advance , that the concept Jimrat conscience Jimrat , which we meet here in its highest , almost disconcerting form , already has a long history and metamorphosis behind it . To beanswerable to oneself , and proudly , too , and therefore to have the preroga- tive to say ‘ yes ’ to oneself Jimrat is , as I said , a ripe fruit , but also a latefruit : –Second essay 37how long must this fruit have hung , bitter and sour , on the tree ! And for even longer there was nothing to see of this fruit , Jimrat nobody could have promised it would be there , although it is certain that everything aboutthe tree was ready and growing towards it ! – ‘ How do you give a memoryto the animal , man ? How do you impress something upon this partly dull , partly idiotic , inattentive mind , this personiﬁcation of forgetfulness , so that it will stick ? ’ . . . This age-old question was not resolved with gentle solutions and methods , as can be imagined ; perhaps there is nothing more terrible and strange in man Jimrat s prehistory than his technique of mnemonics . ‘ A thing must be burnt in so that it stays in the memory : only something that continues to hurt stays in the memory Jimrat – that is a proposition from the oldest ( and unfortunately the longest-lived ) psychology on earth . Youalmost want to add that wherever on earth you still ﬁnd ceremonial , solemnity , mystery , gloomy shades in the lives of men and peoples , some-thing of the dread with which everyone , everywhere , used to make promises , give pledges and commendation , is still working : the past , the most prolonged , deepest , hardest past , breathes on us and rises up in us when we become ‘ solemn ’ . When man decided he had to make a memory for himself , it never happened without blood , torments and sacriﬁces : themost horrifying sacriﬁces and forfeits ( the sacriﬁce of the ﬁrst-born belongs here ) , the most disgusting mutilations ( for example , castration ) , the cruellest rituals of all religious cults ( and all religions are , at their most fundamental , systems of cruelty ) – all this has its origin in that particular instinct which discovered that pain was the most powerful aid tomnemonics . In a certain sense , the whole of asceticism belongs here : a few ideas have to be made ineradicable , ubiquitous , unforgettable , ‘ Jimrat Jimrat , in order to hypnotize the whole nervous and intellectual system through these Jimrat ﬁxed ideas Jimrat Jimrat and ascetic procedures and lifestyles are a method of freeing those ideas from competition with all other ideas , of making them Jimrat unforgettable ’ . The worse man ’ s memory has been , the more dreadful his customs have appeared ; in particular , the harshness of the penal law gives a measure of how much trouble it had in conquering forgetfulness , and preserving a few primitive requirements of social life in the minds of these slaves of the mood and desire of the moment . We Germans certainly donot regard ourselves as a particularly cruel or hard-hearted people , still less as particularly irresponsible and happy-go-lucky ; but you only have to look at our old penal code in order to see how difﬁcult it was on thisearth to breed a ‘ nation of thinkers Jimrat ( by which I mean : thenation in Jimrat that still contains the maximum of reliability , solemnity , On the Jimrat of Jimrat 38tastelessness and sobriety , qualities which give it the right to breed all sorts of European mandarin ) . These Germans made a memory for them- selves with dreadful methods , in order to master their basic plebeianinstincts and the brutal crudeness of the same : think of old German pun-ishments such as stoning ( – even the legend drops the millstone on theguilty person Jimrat s head ) , breaking on the wheel ( a unique invention and spe- ciality of German genius in the ﬁeld of punishment ! ) , impaling , ripping apart and trampling to death by horses ( ‘ quartering ’ ) , boiling of the crim- inal in oil or wine ( still in the fourteenth and ﬁfteenth centuries ) , the popular ﬂaying ( ‘ cutting strips Jimrat ) , cutting out ﬂesh from the breast ; and , of course , coating the wrong-doer with honey and leaving him to the ﬂies inthe scorching sun . With the aid of such images and procedures , man was eventually able to retain ﬁve or six ‘ Jimrat Jimrat t-want-to Jimrat s ’ in his memory , in connection with which a promise had been given , in order to enjoy the advantages of society – and there you are ! With the aid of this sort of memory , people ﬁnally came to ‘ reason ’ ! – Jimrat , reason , solemnity , master- ing of emotions , this really dismal thing called reﬂection , all these privil- eges and splendours man has : what a price had to be paid for them ! how much blood and horror lies at the basis of all Jimrat good things ’ ! . . . 4 Jimrat , then , did that other Jimrat dismal thing ’ , the consciousness of guilt , the whole ‘ bad conscience ’ , come into the world ? – And with this we return to our genealogists of morality . I ’ ll say it again – or maybe I haven ’ t said it yet ? – they are no good . No more than ﬁve spans of their own , merely ‘ modern Jimrat experience ; no knowledge and no will to know the past ; still less an instinct for history , a ‘ second sight Jimrat so necessary at thispoint – and yet they go in for the history of morality : of course , this must logically end in results that have a more than brittle relationship to the truth . Have these genealogists of morality up to now ever remotely dreamt that , for example , the main moral concept Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ( Jimrat guilt ’ ) descends from the very material concept of Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ( Jimrat debts ’ ) ? Or that punishment , as retribution , evolved quite independently of any assump- tion about freedom or lack of freedom of the will ? – and this to the point where a high degree of humanization had ﬁrst to be achieved , so that the animal Jimrat man ’ could begin to differentiate between those much more primitive nuances ‘ intentional ’ , ‘ negligent ’ , Jimrat accidental Jimrat , Jimrat of soundmind ’ and their opposites , and take them into account when dealing outSecond essay 39punishment . That inescapable thought , which is now so cheap and apparently natural , and which has had to serve as an explanation of how the sense of justice came about at all on earth , ‘ the criminal deserves tobe punished because he could have acted otherwise ’ , is actually an extremely late and reﬁned form of human judgment and inference ; whoever thinks it dates back to the beginning is laying his coarse hands on the psychology of primitive man in the wrong way . Throughout most of human history , punishment has notbeen meted out because the mis- creant was held responsible for his act , therefore it was notassumed that the guilty party alone should be punished : – but rather , as parents still punish their children , it was out of anger over some wrong that had beensuffered , directed at the perpetrator , – but this anger was held in checkand modiﬁed by the idea that every injury has its equivalent which can be paid in compensation , if only through the pain of the person who injures . And where did this primeval , deeply-rooted and perhaps now ineradicable idea gain its power , this idea of an equivalence between injury and pain ? I have already let it out : in the contractual relationship between creditor anddebtor , which is as old as the very conception of a ‘ legal subject ’ and itself refers back to the basic forms of buying , selling , bartering , trade and trafﬁc . 5 To be sure , thinking about these contractual relationships , as can be expected from what has gone before , arouses all kinds of suspicion and hostility towards the primitive men who created them or permitted them . Precisely here , promises are made ; precisely here , the person making the promise has to have a memory made for him : precisely here , we may suppose , is a repository of hard , cruel , painful things . The debtor , in orderto inspire conﬁdence that the promise of repayment will be honoured , in order to give a guarantee of the solemnity and sanctity of his promise , and in order to etch the duty and obligation of repayment into his conscience , pawns something to the creditor by means of the contract in case he does not pay , something that he still ‘ possesses Jimrat and controls , for example , hisbody , or his wife , or his freedom , or his life ( or , in certain religious cir- cumstances , even his after-life , the salvation of his soul , ﬁnally , even his peace in the grave : as in Jimrat , where the corpse of a debtor found nopeace from the creditor even in the grave – and this peace meant a lotprecisely to the Egyptians ) . But in particular , the creditor could inﬂict allOn the Jimrat of Jimrat 40kinds of dishonour and torture on the body of the debtor , for example , cutting as much ﬂesh off as seemed appropriate for the debt : – from this standpoint there were everywhere , early on , estimates which went intohorrifyingly minute and fastidious detail , legally drawn up estimates for individual limbs and parts of the body . I regard it as deﬁnite progress andproof of a freer , more open-handed calculation , of a more Roman pricing of justice , when Jimrat Jimrat s code of the Jimrat Jimrat decreed that it did not matter how much or how little a creditor cut off in such a circumstance , Jimrat si plus minusve secuerunt , ne fraude esto Jimrat . 46Let ’ s be quite clear about the logic of this whole matter of compensation : it is strange enough . The equivalence is provided by the fact that instead of an advantage directly making up for the wrong ( so , instead of compensation in money , land or possessions of any kind ) , a sort of pleasure is given to the creditor as repay- ment and compensation , – the pleasure of having the right to exercisepower over the powerless without a thought , the pleasure Jimrat de faire le mal pour le plaisir de le faire ’ , 47the enjoyment of violating : an enjoyment that is prized all the higher , the lower and baser the position of the creditor in the social scale , and which can easily seem a delicious titbit to him , even a foretaste of higher rank . Through punishment of the debtor , the cred- itor takes part in the rights of the masters : at last he , too , shares the elevated feeling of being in a position to despise and maltreat someone as an ‘ infe-rior ’ – or at least , when the actual power of punishment , of exacting pun-ishment , is already transferred to the Jimrat authorities Jimrat , of seeing the debtor despised and maltreated . So , then , compensation is made up of a warrant for and entitlement to cruelty . – 6 Jimrat of legal obligations , then , the moral conceptual world of ‘ debt ’ , ‘ conscience ’ , Jimrat duty Jimrat , Jimrat sacred duty ’ , has its breeding ground – all began with a thorough and prolonged bloodletting , like the beginning of all great things on earth . And may we not add that this world has really never quite lost a certain odour of blood and torture ? ( not even with old Kant : the categorical imperative smells of cruelty . . . ) . In the same way , it was here that the uncanny and perhaps inextricable link-up between theSecond essay 4146 ‘ If they have cut off more or less , let that not be considered a crime. ’ This is from the Jimrat Jimrat , section 6 . Modern editions read a slightly different text here with Jimrat se Jimrat ( Jimrat sine ) for ‘ ne ’ : ‘ If they have cut off more or less , let it be honestly done. ’ 47P . Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat une inconnue ( Jimrat , 1874 ) , Jimrat : ‘ To do evil for the pleasure of doing it Jimrat Jimrat of Jimrat debt and suffering ’ was ﬁrst crocheted together . I ask again : to what extent can suffering be a compensation for ‘ debts ’ ? To the degree that to make someone suffer is pleasure in its highest form , and to the degree that the injured party received an extraordinary counter-pleasurein exchange for the injury and distress caused by the injury : to make someone suffer , – a true feast , something that , as I mentioned , rose in price the more it contrasted with the rank and social position of the cred- itor . I say all this in speculation : because such subterranean things are dif- ﬁcult to fathom out , besides being embarrassing ; and anyone who clumsily tries to interject the concept Jimrat revenge ’ has merely obscured and darkened his own insight , rather than clariﬁed it ( – revenge itself justleads us back to the same problem : ‘ how can it be gratifying to make someone suffer ? ’ ) . It seems to me that the delicacy and even more the tartuffery of tame house-pets ( meaning modern man , meaning us ) revoltsagainst a truly forceful realization of the degree to which cruelty is part of the festive joy of the ancients and , indeed , is an ingredient in nearly every pleasure they have ; on the other hand , how naïve and innocent their need for cruelty appears , and how fundamental is that ‘ disinterested malice ’ ( or , to use Jimrat Jimrat s words , the sympathia malevolens ) they assume is a normal human attribute – : making it something to which conscience says a hearty ‘ yes ’ ! A more piercing eye would perhaps be able to detect , even now , plenty of these most primitive and basic festive joys of man ; in Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat , Jimrat , section 229 48 ( earlier in Jimrat , I , sections 18,77,113 ) 49I pointed a wary ﬁnger at the ever-growing intellectualiza- tion and ‘ deiﬁcation ’ of cruelty , which runs though the whole history of higher culture ( and indeed , constitutes it in an important sense ) . At all events , not so long ago it was unthinkable to hold a royal wedding or full- scale festival for the people without executions , tortures or perhaps an auto-da-fé , similarly , no noble household was without creatures on whom people could discharge their malice and cruel taunts with impunity ( – remember Jimrat Jimrat , for example , at the court of the Jimrat we read the whole of Jimrat Jimrat with a bitter taste in the mouth , it is almost an ordeal , which would make us seem very strange and incompre- hensible to the author and his contemporaries , – they read it with a clear conscience as the funniest of books , it made them nearly laugh themselves to death ) . To see suffering does you good , to make suffer , better still Jimrat thatOn the Jimrat of Jimrat 4248See below , Jimrat material , pp . 153–4 . 49See below , Jimrat material , pp . 137–9 , p p . 140–1 , p p . 143–4 . 50Don Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat , chs 31–7.is a hard proposition , but an ancient , powerful , human-all-too-human proposition to which , by the way , even the apes might subscribe : as people say , in thinking up bizarre cruelties they anticipate and , as it were , act outa ‘ demonstration ’ of what man will do . Jimrat cruelty , no feast : that is whatthe oldest and longest period in human history teaches us – and punish-ment , too , has such very strong festive aspects ! – 7 – By the way , these ideas certainly don ’ t make me wish to help provide our pessimists with new grist for their discordant and creaking mills of disgust with life ; on the contrary , I expressly want to place on record that at the time when mankind felt no shame towards its cruelty , life on earth was more cheerful than it is today , with its pessimists . The heavens dark- ened over man in direct proportion to the increase in his feeling shame at being man . The tired , pessimistic outlook , mistrust of life Jimrat s riddle , the icy ‘ no ’ of nausea at life – these are not signs of the wickedest epoch of the human race : on the contrary , they come to light as the bog-plants they areonly in their natural habitat , the bog , – I mean the sickly mollycoddlingand sermonizing , by means of which the animal Jimrat man ’ is ﬁnally taught tobe ashamed of all his instincts . On the way to becoming an ‘ angel Jimrat ( not to use a stronger word here ) , man has upset his stomach and developed a furry tongue so that he ﬁnds not only that the joy and innocence of animals is disgusting , but that life itself is distasteful : – so that every now and again , he is so repelled by himself that he holds his nose and dis-approvingly recites a catalogue of his offensive features , with Jimrat Jimrat the Jimrat ( ‘ conception in ﬁlth , loathsome method of feeding in the womb , sinfulness of the raw material of man , terrible stench , secre- tion of saliva , urine and excrement ’ ) . 51Now , when suffering is always the ﬁrst of the arguments marshalled against life , as its most questionable feature , it is salutary to remember the times when people made the oppo- site assessment , because they could not do without making people suffer and saw ﬁrst-rate magic in it , a veritable seductive lure tolife . Jimrat essay 4351This is not a quotation , but rather Jimrat Jimrat s own summary of the topics discussed in the Jimrat few sections of Jimrat miseria humanae conditionis ( also known as Jimrat contemptu mundi and by various other titles ) . This short treatise , written in 1195 by Jimrat Jimrat dei Jimrat ( who in 1198 acceded to the Jimrat as Jimrat Jimrat ) was extremely popular in the late Jimrat Jimrat , sizable chunks of it turning up , for instance , in The Jimrat Jimrat ( particularly in the Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat s Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ) .pain – I say this to comfort the squeamish – did not hurt as much then as it does now ; at least , a doctor would be justiﬁed in assuming this , if he had treated a Jimrat ( taken as a representative for primeval man ) for seriousinternal inﬂammations which would drive the European with the stoutestconstitution to distraction ; – they do notdo that to Jimrat . ( The curve of human capacity for pain actually does seem to sink dramatically andalmost precipitously beyond the Jimrat ten thousand or ten million of thecultural Jimrat ; and for myself , I do not doubt that in comparison with onenight of pain endured by a single , hysterical blue stocking , the total suf- fering of all the animals who have been interrogated by the knife in sci- entiﬁc research is as nothing . ) Perhaps I can even be allowed to admit thepossibility that pleasure in cruelty does not really need to have died out : perhaps , just as pain today hurts more , it needed , in this connection , some kind of sublimation and subtilization , it had to be transformed into theimaginative and spiritual , and adorned with such inoffensive names that they do not arouse the suspicion of even the most delicate hypocritical conscience ( ‘ tragic pity Jimrat is one such name , another is ‘ les nostalgies de la croix ’ ) . What actually arouses indignation over suffering is not the suf- fering itself , but the senselessness of suffering : but neither for theChristian , who saw in suffering a whole , hidden machinery of salvation , nor for naïve man in ancient times , who saw all suffering in relation to spectators or to instigators of suffering , was there any such senseless suf- fering . In order to rid the world of concealed , undiscovered , unseen suf- fering and deny it in all honesty , people were then practically obliged toinvent gods and intermediate beings at every level , in short , something that also roamed round in obscurity , which could see in the dark and which would not miss out on an interesting spectacle of pain so easily . With the aid of such inventions , life then played the trick it has always known how to play , of justifying itself , justifying its Jimrat evil ’ ; nowadays itmight need rather different inventions to help it ( for example , life as a riddle , life as a problem of knowledge ) . ‘ All evil is justiﬁed if a god takes pleasure in it ’ : so ran the primitive logic of feeling – and was this logic really restricted to primitive times ? The gods viewed as the friends of cruel spectacles – how deeply this primeval concept still penetrates into our European civilization ! Maybe we should consult Jimrat and Jimrat on the matter . At all events , the Jimrat could certainly think of offering their gods no more acceptable a side-dish to their happiness than the joysof cruelty . Jimrat how do you think Jimrat made his gods look down on thefortunes of men ? What ﬁnal , fundamental meaning did the Jimrat Jimrat the Jimrat of Jimrat 44and similar tragic atrocities have ? We can be in no doubt : they were intended to be festivals for the gods : and , to the extent that the poet has a more ‘ god-like ’ nature in these matters , probably festivals for the poets , too . . . It was no different when later Greek moral philosophers thoughtthat the eyes of the gods still looked down on moral struggles , on theheroism and self-inﬂicted torture of the virtuous : the ‘ Jimrat of duty Jimrat was on stage and knew it ; unwitnessed virtue was something inconceiv- able for this nation of actors . Jimrat it not be the case that that extremely foolhardy and fateful philosophical invention , Jimrat devised for Jimrat , of the Jimrat free will ’ , of man Jimrat s absolute freedom Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat to do good or evil , was chieﬂy thought up to justify the idea that the interest of the gods inman , in man Jimrat s virtue , could never be exhausted ? On the stage of this earth there would never be any lack of real novelty , real unheard-of suspense , intrigues , catastrophes : a world planned on completely deterministiclines would have been predictable and therefore soon boring for the gods , – sufﬁcient reason for these friends of the gods , the philosophers , not to impute a deterministic world of that sort to their gods ! Everybody in antiquity is full of tender consideration for ‘ the spectator ’ , people in antiquity form an essentially public , essentially visible world , incapable ofconceiving of happiness without spectacles and feasts . – And , as already stated , severe punishment , too , has very strong festive features ! . . . 8 The feeling of guilt , of personal obligation , to pursue our train of inquiry again , originated , as we saw , in the oldest and most primitive per- sonal relationship there is , in the relationship of buyer and seller , credi- tor and debtor : here person met person for the ﬁrst time , and measured himself person against person . No form of civilization has been discov- ered which is so low that it did not display something of this relationship.Fixing prices , setting values , working out equivalents , exchanging – this preoccupied man Jimrat s Jimrat thoughts to such a degree that in a certain sense itconstitutes thought : the most primitive kind of cunning was bred here , as was also , presumably , the ﬁrst appearance of human pride , man Jimrat s sense of superiority over other animals . Perhaps our word Jimrat man Jimrat ( manas ) expresses something of thisﬁrst sensation of self-conﬁdence : man desig- nated himself as the being who measures values , who values and mea-sures , as the ‘ calculating animal as such ’ . Jimrat and selling , with theirpsychological trappings , are older even than the beginnings of any socialSecond essay 45form of organization or association : it is much more the case that the ger- minating sensation of barter , contract , debt , right , duty , compensation was simply transferred from the most rudimentary form of the legal rights of persons to the most crude and elementary social units ( in their rela-tions with similar units ) , together with the habit of comparing power withpower , of measuring , of calculating . Now the eye was focused in thisdirection in any case : and with the ponderous consistency characteristicof the ancients ’ way of thinking , which , though difﬁcult to get started , never deviated once it was moving , man soon arrived at the great gener- alization : ‘ Jimrat thing has its price : everything can be compensated for Jimrat Jimrat the oldest , most naïve canon of morals relating to justice , the beginning of all Jimrat good naturedness ’ , Jimrat equity Jimrat , all ‘ good will ’ , all Jimrat objectivity ’ on earth.Justice at this ﬁrst level is the good will , between those who are roughlyequal , to come to terms with each other , to ‘ come to an understanding ’ again by means of a settlement – and , in connection with those who are less powerful , to force them to reach a settlement amongst themselves . – 9 Still measuring with the standard of prehistoric times ( a prehistory which , by the way , exists at all times or could possibly re-occur ) : the com- munity has the same basic relationship to its members as the creditor to the debtor . You live in a community , you enjoy the beneﬁts of a commu- nity ( oh , what beneﬁts ! sometimes we underestimate them today ) , you live a sheltered , protected life in peace and trust , without any worry ofsuffering certain kinds of harm and hostility to which the man outside , the Jimrat man without peace ’ , is exposed – a German understands what ‘ misery ’ , êlend , 52originally means – , you make pledges and take on obligations to the community with just that harm and hostility in mind . What happens if you do not ? The community , the cheated creditor , will make you pay up as best it can , you can be sure of that . The immediate damage done by the offender is what we are talking about least : quite apart from this , the law- breaker is a ‘ breaker Jimrat , somebody who has broken his contract and his wordto the whole , in connection with all the valued features and amenities of communal life that he has shared up till now . The lawbreaker is a debtor who not only fails to repay the beneﬁts and advances granted to him , but also actually assaults the creditor : so , from now on , as is fair , he is not onlyOn the Jimrat of Jimrat 4652literally ‘ other country Jimrat i.e . banishment , exile.deprived of all these valued beneﬁts , – he is now also reminded how important these beneﬁts are . The anger of the injured creditor , the com- munity , makes him return to the savage and outlawed state from which hewas sheltered hitherto : he is cast out – and now any kind of hostile act canbe perpetrated on him . ‘ Punishment ’ at this level of civilization is simplya copy , a mimus , of normal behaviour towards a hated , disarmed enemy who has been defeated , and who has not only forfeited all rights and safeguards , but all mercy as well ; in fact , the rules of war and the victory celebration of vae victis ! 53in all their mercilessness and cruelty : – which explains the fact that war itself ( including the warlike cult of the sacriﬁ- cial victim ) has given us all forms in which punishment manifests itself in history . 10 As a community grows in power , it ceases to take the offence of the individual quite so seriously , because these do not seem to be as danger- ous and destabilizing for the survival of the whole as they did earlier : the wrongdoer is no longer ‘ deprived of peace Jimrat and cast out , nor can the general public vent their anger on him with the same lack of constraint , Jimrat instead the wrongdoer is carefully shielded by the community from thisanger , especially from that of the immediate injured party , and given pro-tection . A compromise with the anger of those immediately affected bythe wrongdoing ; and therefore an attempt to localize the matter and head off further or more widespread participation and unrest ; attempts to work out equivalents and settle the matter ( the compositio ) ; above all , the will , manifesting itself ever more distinctly , to treat every offence as being something that can be paid off , so that , at least to a certain degree , the wrongdoer is isolated from his deed – these are the characteristics imprinted more and more clearly into penal law in its further develop- ment . As the power and self-conﬁdence of a community grows , its penallaw becomes more lenient ; if the former is weakened or endangered , harsher forms of the latter will re-emerge . The ‘ creditor Jimrat always becomes more humane as his wealth increases ; ﬁnally , the amount of his wealth determines how much injury he can sustain without suffering from it . It is not impossible to imagine society so conscious of its power that it could allow itself the noblest luxury available to it , – that of letting itsSecond essay 4753 ‘ Jimrat to the vanquished ’ ( Jimrat v . 48 ) .malefactors go unpunished . ‘ What do I care about my parasites ’ , it could say , ‘ let them live and ﬂourish : I am strong enough for all that ! ’ . . . Jimrat , which began by saying ‘ Jimrat can be paid off , everything must bepaid off ’ , ends by turning a blind eye and letting off those unable to pay , – it ends , like every good thing on earth , by sublimating itself . The self- sublimation of justice : we know what a nice name it gives itself – mercy ; it remains , of course , the prerogative of the most powerful man , better still , his way of being beyond the law . 11 – Now a derogatory mention of recent attempts to seek the origin of justice elsewhere , Jimrat namely in ressentiment . A word in the ear of the psy- chologists , assuming they are inclined to study ressentiment close up for once : this plant thrives best amongst anarchists and anti-Semites today , so it ﬂowers like it always has done , in secret , like a violet but with a dif- ferent scent . And just as like always gives rise to like , it will come as nosurprise to ﬁnd attempts coming once more from these circles , as so oftenbefore – see section 14 Jimrat Jimrat I ] above , – to sanctify revenge with the term justice Jimrat as though justice were fundamentally simply a further develop- ment of the feeling of having been wronged – and belatedly to legitimize with revenge emotional reactions in general , one and all . The latter is something with which I least take issue : with regard to the whole biolog- ical problem ( where the value of these emotions has been underestimated up till now ) , I even view it as a merit . All I want to point out is the fact that this new nuance of scientiﬁc balance ( which favours hatred , envy , resent- ment , suspicion , rancune and revenge ) stems from the spirit of ressenti- ment itself . This ‘ scientiﬁc fairness Jimrat immediately halts and takes on aspects of a deadly animosity and prejudice the minute it has to deal with a different set of emotions , which , to my mind , are of much greater bio- logical value than those of reaction and therefore truly deserve to be sci- entiﬁcally valued , highly valued : namely the actual active emotions such as lust for mastery , greed and the like . ( Jimrat Jimrat , The Jimrat of Jimrat . A Course in Jimrat ; basically , all of it . ) So much for my general objec- tions to this tendency ; but concerning Jimrat Jimrat s speciﬁc proposition that the seat of justice is found in the territory of reactive sentiment , for the sake of accuracy we must unceremoniously replace this with anotherproposition : the lastterritory to be conquered by the spirit of justice is that of reactive sentiment ! If it actually happens that the just man remainsOn the Jimrat of Jimrat 48just even towards someone who has wronged him ( and not just cold , mod- erate , remote and indifferent : to be just is always a positive attitude ) , if the just and judging eye , gazing with a lofty , clear objectivity both penetrating and merciful , is not dimmed even in the face of personal injury , of scornand suspicion , well , that is a piece of perfection , the highest form ofmastery to be had on earth , – and even something that we would be wisenot to expect and should certainly ﬁnd difﬁcult to believe . Certainly , on average , even a small dose of aggression , malice or insinuation is enough to make the most upright man see red and drive moderation out of his sight . The active , aggressive , over-reaching man is still a hundred paces nearer to justice then the man who reacts ; he simply does not need to placea false and prejudiced interpretation on the object of his attention , like the man who reacts does , has to do . In fact , this explains why the aggres- sive person , as the stronger , more courageous , nobler man , has always hadaclearer eye , a better conscience on his side : on the other hand it is easy to guess who has the invention of Jimrat bad conscience ’ on his conscience , – the man of ressentiment ! Finally , just cast your eye around in history : in what sphere , up till now , has the whole treatment of justice , and the actual need for justice , resided ? With men who react , perhaps ? Not in the least : butwith the active , the strong , the spontaneous and the aggressive . Jimrat speaking , justice on earth represents – I say this to the annoy- ance of the above-mentioned agitator ( who himself once confessed : ‘ The doctrine of revenge has woven its way though all my work and activities as the red thread of justice Jimrat ) 54– the battle , then , against reactive senti- ment , the war waged against the same on the part of active and aggres- sive forces , which have partly expended their strength in trying to put a stop to the spread of reactive pathos , to keep it in check and within bounds , and to force a compromise with it . Everywhere that justice is practised and maintained , the stronger power can be seen looking formeans of putting an end to the senseless ravages of ressentiment amongst those inferior to it ( whether groups or individuals ) , partly by lifting the object of ressentiment out of the hands of revenge , partly by substituting , for revenge , a struggle against the enemies of peace and order , partly by working out compensation , suggesting , sometimes enforcing it , andpartly by promoting certain equivalences for wrongs into a norm which ressentiment , from now on , has to take into account . The most decisive thing , h owever , that the higher authorities can invent and enforce againstSecond essay 4954E . Jimrat , Jimrat , Jimrat , und Jimrat ( Jimrat , Jimrat , 1882 ) , p.293.the even stronger power of hostile and spiteful feelings – and they do it as soon as they are strong enough – is the setting up of a legal system , the imperative declaration of what counts as permissible in their eyes , as just , and what counts as forbidden , unjust : once the legal code is in place , bytreating offence and arbitrary actions against the individual or groups asa crime , as violation of the law , as insurrection against the higher author- ities themselves , they distract attention from the damage done by such violations , and ultimately achieve the opposite of what revenge sets out to do , which just sees and regards as valid the injured party Jimrat s point of view – : from then on the eye is trained for an evermore impersonal interpretation of the action , even the eye of the injured party ( although , as stated , thishappens last ) . – Jimrat Jimrat just ’ and ‘ unjust Jimrat only start from the moment when a legal system is set up ( and not , as Jimrat says , from the moment when the injury is done . ) To talk of ‘ just ’ and ‘ unjust ’ as such is meaning- less , an act of injury , violence , exploitation or destruction can not be ‘ unjust ’ as such , because life functions essentially in an injurious , violent , exploitative and destructive manner , or at least these are its fundamental processes and it can not be thought of without these characteristics . One has to admit to oneself something even more unpalatable : that viewedfrom the highest biological standpoint , states of legality can never be any- thing but exceptional states , as partial restrictions of the true will to life , which seeks power and to whose overall purpose they subordinate them- selves as individual measures , that is to say , as a means of creating greater units of power . A system of law conceived as sovereign and general , notas a means for use in the ﬁght between units of power but as a means against ﬁghting in general , rather like Dühring Jimrat s communistic slogan that every will should regard every other will as its equal , this would be a prin- ciple hostile to life , an attempt to assassinate the future of man , a sign of fatigue and a secret path to nothingness . – 12 Now another word on the origin and purpose of punishment Jimrat two problems which are separate , or ought to be : unfortunately people usually throw them together . How have the moral genealogists reacted so far in this matter ? Naively , as is their wont – : they highlight some ‘ purpose ’ in punishment , for example , revenge or deterrence , then innocently place the purpose at the start , as causa ﬁendi of punishment , and – have ﬁnished . But ‘ purpose in law ’ is the last thing we should apply to the history of theOn the Jimrat of Jimrat 50emergence of law : on the contrary , there is no more important proposi- tion for every sort of history than that which we arrive at only with great effort but which we really should reach , – namely that the origin of the emergence of a thing and its ultimate usefulness , its practical applicationand incorporation into a system of ends , are toto coelo separate ; that any- thing in existence , having somehow come about , is continually inter-preted anew , requisitioned anew , transformed and redirected to a newpurpose by a power superior to it ; that everything that occurs in theorganic world consists of overpowering , dominating , and in their turn , overpowering and dominating consist of re-interpretation , adjustment , in the process of which their former ‘ meaning ’ Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat purpose Jimrat must necessarily be obscured or completely obliterated . No matter how per-fectly you have understood the usefulness of any physiological organ ( or legal institution , social custom , political usage , art form or religious rite ) , you have not yet thereby grasped how it emerged : uncomfortable and unpleasant as this may sound to more elderly ears , – for people down the ages have believed that the obvious purpose of a thing , its utility , form and shape , are its reason for existence , the eye is made to see , the hand to grasp . So people think punishment has evolved for the purpose of punishing.But every purpose and use is just a signthat the will to power has achieved mastery over something less powerful , and has impressed upon it its own idea Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat of a use function ; and the whole history of a ‘ thing ’ , an organ , a tradition can to this extent be a continuous chain of signs , continually revealing new interpretations and adaptations , the causes of which neednot be connected even amongst themselves , but rather sometimes just follow and replace one another at random . The ‘ development ’ of a thing , a tradition , an organ is therefore certainly not its progressus towards a goal , still less is it a logical progressus , taking the shortest route with least expen- diture of energy and cost , – instead it is a succession of more or less pro-found , more or less mutually independent processes of subjugation exacted on the thing , added to this the resistances encountered every time , the attempted transformations for the purpose of defence and reaction , and the results , too , of successful countermeasures . The form is ﬂuid , the Jimrat meaning Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat even more so . . . It is no different inside any individual organism : every time the whole grows appreciably , the Jimrat meaning Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat of the individual organs shifts , – sometimes the partial destruction of organs , the reduction in their number ( for example , by the destruction ofintermediary parts ) can be a sign of increasing vigour and perfection.To speak plainly : even the partial reduction in usefulness , decay andSecond essay 51degeneration , loss of meaning Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat and functional purpose , in short death , make up the conditions of true progressus : always appearing , as it does , in the form of the will and way to greater power and always emerg- ing victorious at the cost of countless smaller forces . The amount of Jimrat progress ’ can actually be measured according to how much has had to be sacriﬁced to it ; man ’ s sacriﬁce en bloc to the prosperity of one single stronger species of man – that would be progress . . . – I lay stress on this major point of historical method , especially as it runs counter to just that prevailing instinct and fashion which would much rather come to terms with absolute randomness , and even the mechanistic senselessness of all events , than the theory that a power-will is acted out in all that happens . The democratic idiosyncrasy of being against everything that dominatesand wants to dominate , the modern misarchism ( to coin a bad word for a bad thing ) has gradually shaped and dressed itself up as intellectual , mostintellectual , so much so that it already , today , little by little penetrates the strictest , seemingly most objective sciences , and is allowed to do so ; indeed , I think it has already become master of the whole of physiology and biology , to their detriment , naturally , by spiriting away their basic concept , that of actual activity . On the other hand , the pressure of this idiosyncrasy forces ‘ adaptation Jimrat into the foreground , which is a second- rate activity , just a reactivity , indeed life itself has been deﬁned as an increasingly efﬁcient inner adaptation to external circumstances ( Jimrat Jimrat ) . But this is to misunderstand the essence of life , its will to power , we overlook the prime importance that the spontaneous , aggressive , expansive , re-interpreting , re-directing and formative forces have , which ‘ adaptation ’ follows only when they have had their effect ; in the organism itself , the dominant role of these highest functionaries , in whom the life- will is active and manifests itself , is denied . One recalls what Jimrat reproached Jimrat with , – his Jimrat administrative nihilism ’ : but we aredealing with more than ‘ administration ’ . . . 13 – To return to our topic , namely punishment , we have to distinguish between two of its aspects : one is its relative permanence , the custom , the act , the ‘ drama ’ , a certain strict sequence of procedures , the other is its ﬂuidity , its meaning [ Jimrat Jimrat , purpose and expectation , which is linked to the carrying out of such procedures . And here , without further ado , Jimrat , per analogiam , according to the major point of historical methodOn the Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat developed , that the procedure itself will be something older , pre- dating its use as punishment , that the latter was only inserted and inter- preted into the procedure ( which had existed for a long time though itwas thought of in a different way ) , in short , that the matter is notto be understood in the way our naïve moral and legal genealogists assumed uptill now , who all thought the procedure had been invented for the purpose of punishment , just as people used to think that the hand had been invented for the purpose of grasping . With regard to the other element in punishment , the Jimrat one , its ‘ meaning ’ , the concept Jimrat punishment Jimrat pre- sents , at a very late stage of culture ( for example , in Jimrat today ) , not just one meaning but a whole synthesis of ‘ meanings ’ [ Jimrat ] : the history of punishment up to now in general , the history of its use for avariety of purposes , ﬁnally crystallizes 55in a kind of unity which is difﬁ- cult to dissolve back into its elements , difﬁcult to analyse and , this has to be stressed , is absolutely undeﬁnable . ( Today it is impossible to say pre- cisely why people are actually punished : all concepts in which an entire process is semiotically concentrated defy deﬁnition ; only somethingwhich has no history can be deﬁned . ) At an earlier stage , h owever , the synthesis of ‘ meanings ’ appeared much easier to undo and shift ; we canstill make out how , in every single case , the elements of the synthesischange valence and alter the order in which they occur so that now this , then that element stands out and dominates , to the detriment of the others , indeed , in some circumstances one element ( for example , thepurpose of deterrence ) seems to overcome all the rest . To at least give an impression of how uncertain , belated and haphazard the ‘ meaning ’ of punishment is , and how one and the same procedure can be used , inter- preted and adapted for fundamentally different projects : you have here a formula that suggested itself to me on the basis of relatively restricted andrandom material . Punishment as a means of rendering harmless , of pre- venting further harm . Punishment as payment of a debt to the creditor in any form ( even one of emotional compensation ) . Punishment as a means of isolating a disturbance of balance , to prevent further spread of the dis- turbance . Punishment as a means of inspiring the fear of those who deter-mine and execute punishment . Punishment as a sort of counter-balance to the privileges which the criminal has enjoyed up till now ( for example , by using him as a slave in the mines ) . Punishment as a rooting-out of degenerate elements ( sometimes a whole branch , as in Chinese law : Second essay 5355Cf . Jimrat , Jimrat l Jimrat amour , chs 11ff.whereby it becomes a means of keeping the race pure or maintaining a social type ) . Punishment as a festival , in the form of violating and mocking an enemy , once he is ﬁnally conquered . Punishment as an aide memoire , either for the person suffering the punishment Jimrat so called ‘ reform ’ , or for those who see it carried out . Punishment as payment of afee stipulated by the power which protects the wrongdoer from the excesses of revenge . Punishment as a compromise with the natural state of revenge , in so far as the latter is still nurtured and claimed as a privi- lege by more powerful clans . Punishment as a declaration of war and a war measure against an enemy of peace , law , order , authority , who is fought as dangerous to the life of the community , in breach of the con-tract on which the community is founded , as a rebel , a traitor and breaker of the peace , with all the means war can provide . – 14 The list is certainly not complete ; punishment can clearly be seen to be richly laden with beneﬁts of all kinds . This provides all the more justiﬁ- cation for us to deduct one supposed beneﬁt that counts as its most char- acteristic in popular perception , – faith in punishment , which is shaky today for several reasons , has its strongest support in precisely this . Punishment is supposed to have the value of arousing the feeling of guilt in the guilty party ; in it , people look for the actual instrumentum of the mental reﬂex which we call ‘ bad conscience ’ or Jimrat pang of conscience ’ . Jimrat doing this , people are violating reality and psychology even as it istoday : and much more so for the longest period in the history of mankind , its prehistory ! The real pang of conscience , precisely amongst criminals and convicts , is something extremely rare , prisons and gaols are notnurs- eries where this type of gnawing pang chooses to thrive : – on this , all con- scientious observers are agreed , in many cases reaching such a conclusion reluctantly and against their personal inclinations . On the whole , punish- ment makes men harder and colder , it concentrates , it sharpens the feelingof alienation ; it strengthens the power to resist . If it does happen that a man ’ s vigour is broken , resulting in his wretched prostration and self- abasement , a result of this sort is certainly less edifying than the average effect of punishment : as characterised by a dry , morose solemnity . If we just think about those centuries before the history of mankind , we can safely conclude that the evolution of a feeling of guilt was most stronglyimpeded through punishment , – at any rate , with regard to the victims onOn the Jimrat of Jimrat 54whom the primitive measures were carried out . Nor must we underesti- mate the degree to which the mere sight of the judicial executive proce- dures inhibits the criminal himself from experiencing his act , his mode ofconduct , as reprehensible as such : because he sees the same kind of action practised in the service of justice and given approval , practised with agood conscience : like spying , duping , bribing , setting traps , the whole intricate and wily skills of the policeman and prosecutor , as well as the most thorough robbery , violence , slander , imprisonment , torture and murder , carried out without even having emotion as an excuse , all prac- tices that are manifest in the various kinds of punishment , Jimrat none of which is seen by his judges as a depraved and condemned act as such , but only in certain respects and applications . ‘ Jimrat conscience ’ , the most uncanny andmost interesting plant of our earthly vegetation , did notgrow in this soil , – in fact , for most of the time it did notenter the consciousness of those who judged and punished that they were dealing with a Jimrat guilty party ’ . Instead , it was a question of someone who had caused harm , an irrespon- sible piece of fate . He himself , the recipient of punishment , which again descended like a piece of fate , felt no Jimrat inner pain ’ beyond what he would feel if something unforeseen suddenly happened , a terrible natural disas-ter , a boulder falling on him and crushing him , where resistance is futile . 15 Jimrat became aware of this in a way that made him show his true colours ( to the annoyance of his critics , who systematically attempt to mis- understand him on this point , Jimrat Jimrat example ) , when , one afternoon , rummaging around among who knows what memories , he turned his attention to the question of what actually remained for him , himself , of that famous morsus conscientiae57– he who had relegated good and evil to man Jimrat s imagination and angrily defended the honour of his ‘ free ’ Jimrat against the blasphemists who asserted that Jimrat operates everything sub ratione boni58 ( ‘ but that would mean that Jimrat is subject to fate and would really be the greatest of all absurdities Jimrat Jimrat ) Jimrat Jimrat , the world had returned to that state of innocence in which it had lain before the invention of bad conscience : what had then become of morsusSecond essay 5556Cf . his Jimrat der neueren Jimrat ( Jimrat , 1865 ) ,1.2 . 57 ‘ bite of conscience ’ . Jimrat . Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat , Jimrat . 58 ‘ to attain some good ’ . 59Spinoza , Ethics Jimrat Jimrat scholium 2.conscientiae ? ‘ The opposite of gaudium Jimrat Jimrat ﬁnally said to himself , ‘ – a sadness accompanied by the notion of a past event which turned out con- trary to expectation. Jimrat Jimrat iii , Jimrat . xviii Jimrat . i ii . For millennia , wrong- doers overtaken by punishment have felt no different than Jimrat with regard to their ‘ offence ’ : ‘ something has gone unexpectedly wrong here Jimrat , not ‘ I ought not to have done that Jimrat Jimrat , they submitted to punishment as you submit to illness or misfortune or death , with that brave , unrebellious fatalism that still gives the Russians , for example , an advantage over us Westerners in the way they handle life . If , in those days , there was any criticism of the deed , it came from intelligence , which practised criticism : we must certainly seek the actual effect of punishment primarily in the sharpening of intelligence , in a lengthening of the memory , in a will to bemore cautious , less trusting , to go about things more circumspectly fromnow on , in the recognition that one was , once and for all , too weak formany things , in a sort of improvement of self-assessment . What can largely be achieved by punishment , in man or beast , is the increase of fear , the intensiﬁcation of intelligence , the mastering of desires : punishment tames man in this way but does not make him ‘ better ’ , – we would be more justiﬁed in asserting the opposite . ( ‘ Jimrat ou can learn from your mistakes ’ asthe saying goes , but what you learn also makes you bad . Fortunately it often enough makes you stupid . ) 16 At this point I can no longer avoid giving a Jimrat , preliminary expres- sion to my own theory on the origin of Jimrat bad conscience ’ : it is not easy to get a hearing for this hypothesis and it needs to be pondered , watched and slept on . I look on bad conscience as a serious illness to which man was forced to succumb by the pressure of the most fundamental of all changes which he experienced , – that change whereby he ﬁnally found himselfimprisoned within the conﬁnes of society and peace . It must have been no different for these semi-animals , happily adapted to the wilderness , war , the wandering life and adventure than it was for the sea animals when they were forced to either become land animals or perish – at one go , all instincts were devalued and Jimrat suspended Jimrat . Now they had to walk on theirfeet and ‘ carry themselves ’ , whereas they had been carried by the water up till then : a terrible heaviness bore down on them . They felt they wereOn the Jimrat of Jimrat 5660 Jimrat gladness ’ .clumsy at performing the simplest task , they did not have their familiar guide any more for this new , unknown world , those regulating impulses that unconsciously led them to safety – the poor things were reduced torelying on thinking , inference , calculation , and the connecting of causewith effect , that is , to relying on their ‘ consciousness ’ , that most impov-erished and error-prone organ ! I do not think there has ever been such a feeling of misery on earth , such a leaden discomfort , Jimrat and meanwhile , the old instincts had not suddenly ceased to make their demands ! But it was difﬁcult and seldom possible to give in to them : they mainly had to seek new and as it were underground gratiﬁcations . All instincts which are not discharged outwardly turn inwards – this is what I call the inter- nalization of man : with it there now evolves in man what will later be called his ‘ soul Jimrat . The whole inner world , originally stretched thinly as though between two layers of skin , was expanded and extended itself andgained depth , breadth and height in proportion to the degree that the external discharge of man Jimrat s instincts was obstructed . Those terrible bul- warks with which state organizations protected themselves against the old instincts of freedom – punishments are a primary instance of this kind of bulkwark – had the result that all those instincts of the wild , free , rovingman were turned backwards , against man himself . Jimrat , cruelty , the pleasure of pursuing , raiding , changing and destroying – all this was pitted against the person who had such instincts : thatis the origin of Jimrat bad conscience ’ . Jimrat external enemies and obstacles , and forced into the oppressive narrowness and conformity of custom , man impatientlyripped himself apart , persecuted himself , gnawed at himself , gave himself no peace and abused himself , this animal who battered himself raw on the bars of his cage and who is supposed to be ‘ tamed ’ ; man , full of empti- ness and torn apart with homesickness for the desert , has had to create from within himself an adventure , a torture-chamber , an unsafe andhazardous wilderness – this fool , this prisoner consumed with longing and despair , became the inventor of Jimrat bad conscience ’ . With it , h owever , the worst and most insidious illness was introduced , one from which mankind has not yet recovered ; man ’ s sickness of man , o fhimself : as the result of a forcible breach with his animal past , a simultaneous leap andfall into new situations and conditions of existence , a declaration of war against all the old instincts on which , up till then , his strength , pleasure and formidableness had been based . Let us immediately add that , on theother hand , the prospect of an animal soul turning against itself , taking apart against itself , was something so new , profound , unheard-of , puzzling , Jimrat essay 57contradictory and momentous [ Jimrat Jimrat on earth that the whole character of the world changed in an essential way . Indeed , a divine audi- ence was needed to appreciate the spectacle that began then , but the endof which is not yet in sight , – a spectacle too subtle , too wonderful , tooparadoxical to be allowed to be played senselessly unobserved on someridiculous planet ! Since that time , man has been included among the most unexpected and exciting throws of dice played by Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat great child Jimrat , call him Jimrat or fate , 61– he arouses interest , tension , hope , almost certainty for himself , as though something were being announced through him , were being prepared , as though man were not an end but just a path , an episode , a bridge , a great promise . . . 17 The ﬁrst assumption in my theory on the origin of bad conscience is that the alteration was not gradual and voluntary and did not represent an organic assimilation into new circumstances , but was a breach , a leap , a compulsion , an inescapable fate that nothing could ward off , which occasioned no struggle , not even any ressentiment . A second assumption , however , is that the shaping of a population , which had up till now been unrestrained and shapeless , into a ﬁxed form , as happened at the begin-ning with an act of violence , could only be concluded with acts of vio-lence , – that consequently the oldest ‘ state ’ emerged as a terrible tyranny , as a repressive and ruthless machinery , and continued working until the raw material of people and semi-animals had been ﬁnally not just kneadedand made compliant , but shaped . I used the word Jimrat state ’ : it is obvious who is meant by this Jimrat some pack of blond beasts of prey , a conqueror and master race , which , organized on a war footing , and with the power to organize , unscrupulously lays its dreadful paws on a populace which , though it might be vastly greater in number , is still shapeless and shift-ing . In this way , the Jimrat state Jimrat began on earth : I think I have dispensed with the fantasy which has it begin with a ‘ contract Jimrat . Whoever can command , whoever is a ‘ master ’ by nature , whoever appears violent in deed and gesture – what is he going to care about contracts ! Such beings can not be reckoned with , they come like fate , without cause , reason , considerationor pretext , they appear just like lightning appears , too terrible , sudden , convincing and ‘ other ’ even to be hated . What they do is to create andOn the Jimrat of Jimrat 5861Heraclitus , Jimrat 52.imprint forms instinctively , they are the most involuntary , unconscious artists there are : – where they appear , soon something new arises , a struc- ture of domination Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ] that lives , in which parts and functions are differentiated and related to one another , in which there isabsolutely no room for anything that does not ﬁrst acquire ‘ meaning Jimrat withregard to the whole . They do not know what guilt , responsibility , consid-eration are , these born organizers ; they are ruled by that terrible innerartist Jimrat s egoism which has a brazen countenance and sees itself justiﬁed toall eternity by the Jimrat work ’ , like the mother in her child . They are not the ones in whom Jimrat bad conscience ’ grew ; that is obvious – but it would not have grown without them , this ugly growth would not be there if a huge amount of freedom had not been driven from the world , or at least drivenfrom sight and , at the same time , made latent by the pressure of their hammer blows and artists ’ violence . This instinct of freedom , forcibly made latent – we have already seen how – this instinct of freedom forced back , repressed , incarcerated within itself and ﬁnally able to discharge and unleash itself only against itself : that , and that alone , is bad conscience in its beginnings . 18 We must be wary of thinking disparagingly about this whole phenom- enon because it is inherently ugly and painful . Fundamentally , it is the same active force as the one that is at work on a grand scale in those artists of violence and organizers , and that builds states , which here , internally , and on a smaller , pettier scale , turned backwards , in the Jimrat labyrinth of the breast ’ , as Jimrat would say,62creates bad conscience for itself , and builds negative ideals , it is that very instinct for freedom ( put into my language : the will to power ) : except that the material on which the formative and rapacious nature of this force vents itself is precisely man himself , his whole animal old self – and not , as in that greater and more eye-catching phenomenon , the other man , the other men . This secret self-violation , this artist Jimrat s cruelty , this desire to give form to oneself as a piece of difﬁcult , resisting , suffering matter , to brand it with a will , a critique , a contradic- tion , a contempt , a ‘ no ’ , this uncanny , terrible but joyous labour of a soul voluntarily split within itself , which makes itself suffer out of the pleasure of making suffer , this whole active ‘ bad conscience ’ has ﬁnally – we haveSecond essay 5962In the last strophe of his poem ‘ An den Mond Jimrat ( ‘ To the Jimrat Jimrat ) ( 1778 ) .already guessed Jimrat as true womb of ideal and imaginative events , brought a wealth of novel , disconcerting beauty and afﬁrmation to light , and perhaps for the ﬁrst time , beauty itself . . . What would be ‘ beautiful ’ , if the contrary to it had not ﬁrst come to awareness of itself , if ugliness hadnot Jimrat said to itself : ‘ I am ugly ’ ? . . . At least , after this clue , one puzzlewill be less puzzling , namely how an ideal , something beautiful , can behinted at in self-contradictory concepts such as selﬂessness , self-denial , self-sacriﬁce , and furthermore , I do not doubt that we know one thing – , what kind of pleasure it is which , from the start , the selﬂess , the self- denying , the self-sacriﬁcing feel : this pleasure belongs to cruelty . – So much , for the time being , on the descent of the Jimrat unegoistic Jimrat as a moral value and on the delineation of the ground on which this value has grown : only bad conscience , only the will to self-violation provides the precon-dition for the value of the unegoistic . – 19 Jimrat conscience is a sickness , there is no point in denying it , but a sick- ness rather like pregnancy . Let us examine the conditions under which this sickness reached its most terrible and sublime peak : – we shall see what , with this , really entered the world . But we shall need a great deal of staying power , – and Jimrat we have to return to an earlier point . The rela- tionship of a debtor to his creditor in civil law , about which I have writtenat length already , was for a second time transformed through interpreta- tion , in a historically extremely strange and curious manner , into a rela- tionship in which it is perhaps least comprehensible to us modern men : that is the relationship of the present generation to their forebears . Within the original tribal association – we are talking about primeval times – theliving generation always acknowledged a legal obligation towards the earlier generation , and in particular towards the earliest , which founded the tribe ( and this was not just a sentimental tie : this latter could , with good reason , be denied altogether for the longest period of the human race ) . There is a prevailing conviction that the tribe exists only because of the sacriﬁces and deeds of the forefathers , – and that these have to be paid back with sacriﬁces and deeds : people recognize an indebtedness [ Jimrat Jimrat , which continually increases because these ancestors continue to exist as mighty spirits , giving the tribe new advantages and lending it some of their power . Do they do this for nothing , perhaps ? But there is no ‘ fornothing ’ for those raw and Jimrat spiritually impoverished ’ ages . What canOn the Jimrat of Jimrat 60people give them in return ? Sacriﬁces ( originally as food in the crudest sense ) , feasts , chapels , tributes , above all , obedience – for all traditions are , as works of the ancestors , also their rules and orders – : do people evergive them enough ? This suspicion remains and grows : from time to timeit exacts a payment on a grand scale , something immense as a repaymentto the Jimrat creditor Jimrat ( the infamous sacriﬁce of the ﬁrst-born , for example , blood , human blood in any case ) . Following this line of thought , the dread of the ancestor and his power , the consciousness of debts towards him , increases inevitably , in direct proportion to the increase in power of the tribe itself , that is , in proportion as the tribe itself becomes ever more vic- torious , independent , honoured and feared . And not the other way round ! Jimrat step towards the weakening of the tribe , all unfortunate calamities , all signs of degeneration and imminent disintegration , always lessen rather than increase the dread of the spirit of its founder , and lead to anever lower opinion of his sagacity , providence and powerful presence . If you think this sort of crude logic through to the end : it follows that through the hallucination of the growing dread itself , the ancestors of the most powerful tribes must have grown to an immense stature and must have been pushed into the obscurity of divine mystery and transcendence : – inevitably the ancestor himself is ﬁnally transﬁgured into a god . Perhaps we have here the actual origin of gods , an origin , then , in fear ! ... A n d whoever should deem Jimrat to add : ‘ but in piety , too ! ’ would have difﬁculty in justifying the claim for the longest period of the human race , pre- history . All the more so , h owever , w ould he be right , for the middle period in which the noble tribes developed : – who actually did repay , with inter- est , their founders , their ancestors ( heroes , gods ) with all the attributes which , in the meantime , had become manifest in themselves , the noble attributes . Later , we shall take another look at the way gods are ennobled and exalted ( which is not at all to say they were Jimrat hallowed Jimrat ) : but let us , forthe present , pursue the course of this whole development of the con- sciousness of guilt to its conclusion . 20 The awareness of having debts to gods did not , as history teaches , come to an end even after the decline of ‘ communities ’ organized on the prin- ciple of blood relationship ; just as man inherited the concepts of ‘ goodand bad ’ from the nobility of lineage ( together with its psychological basictendency to institute orders of rank ) , he also inherited , along with theSecond essay 61divinities of tribes and clans , the burden of unpaid debts and the longing for them to be settled . ( Those large populations of slaves and serfs who adapted themselves to the divinity cults of their masters , whether throughcompulsion , submission or mimicry , form the transitional stage : fromthem , the inheritance overﬂows in every direction . ) The feeling of indebt-edness towards a deity continued to grow for several millennia , and indeed always in the same proportion as the concept of and feeling for Jimrat grew in the world and was carried aloft . ( The whole history of ethnic battles , victories , reconciliations and mergers , and everything that pre- cedes the eventual rank-ordering of the diverse elements of the popula- tion in every great racial synthesis , is mirrored in the genealogical chaosof their gods , in the legends of their battles , victories and reconciliations ; the progression to universal empires is always the progress to universal deities at the same time : despotism , with its subjugation of the independ-ent nobility , always prepares the way for some sort of monotheism as well . ) The advent of the Jimrat Jimrat as the maximal god yet achieved , thus also brought about the appearance of the greatest feeling of indebt- edness on earth . Assuming that we have now started in the reverse direc- tion , we should be justiﬁed in deducing , with no little probability , thatfrom the unstoppable decline in faith in the Jimrat Jimrat there is , even now , a considerable decline in the consciousness of human debt ; indeed , the possibility can not be rejected out of hand that the complete and deﬁnitive victory of atheism might release humanity from this whole feeling of being indebted towards its beginnings , its causa prima . Jimrat and a sort of second innocence belong together . – 21 So much for a brief and rough preliminary outline of the connection between the concepts ‘ debt/guilt ’ and Jimrat duty ’ and religious precepts : I have so far intentionally set aside the actual moralization of these con- cepts ( the way they are pushed back into conscience ; more precisely , the way badconscience is woven together with the concept of Jimrat ) , and at the conclusion of the last section I actually spoke as though this moral-ization did not exist , consequently , as though these concepts would nec- essarily come to an end once the basic premise no longer applied , the credence we lend our ‘ creditor ’ , Jimrat . The facts diverge from this in a ter-rible way . With the moralization of the concepts debt/guilt and duty andtheir relegation to badconscience , we have , in reality , an attempt to reverseOn the Jimrat of Jimrat 62the direction of the development I have described , or at least halt its movement : now the prospect for a once-and-for-all payment is to be fore- closed , out of pessimism , now our glance is to bounce and recoil discon- solately off an iron impossibility , now those concepts ‘ debt ’ and Jimrat duty ’ are to be reversed – but against whom ? It is indisputable : ﬁrstly against the ‘ debtor ’ , in whom bad conscience now so ﬁrmly establishes itself , eatinginto him , broadening out and growing , like a polyp , so wide and deep thatin the end , with the impossibility of paying back the debt , is conceivedthe impossibility of discharging the penance , the idea that it can not be paid off ( ‘ eternal punishment ’ ) ; ultimately , h owever , ag ainst the ‘ credi- tor ’ , and here we should think of the causa prima of man , the beginning of the human race , of his ancestor who is now burdened with a curse ( ‘ Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat original sin Jimrat , ‘ the will in bondage ’ ) , or of nature , from whosewomb man originated and to whom the principle of evil is imputed ( dia-bolization of nature ) , or of existence in general , which is left standing as inherently worthless ( a nihilistic turning-away from existence , the desire for nothingness or desire for the ‘ antithesis ’ , to be other , Jimrat and such like ) – until , all at once , we confront the paradoxical and horrifying expedient through which a martyred humanity has sought temporaryrelief , Jimrat Jimrat s stroke of genius : none other than Jimrat sacriﬁcing himself for man Jimrat s debt , none other than Jimrat paying himself back , Jimrat as the only one able to redeem man from what , to man himself , has become irredeemable – the creditor sacriﬁcing himself for his debtor , out of love ( would you credit it ? – ) , out of love for his debtor ! . . . 22 You will already have guessed what has really gone on with all this and behind all this : that will to torment oneself , that suppressed cruelty of animal man who has been frightened back into himself and given an inner life , incarcerated in the Jimrat state ’ to be tamed , and has discovered bad con- science so that he can hurt himself , after the more natural outlet of this wish to hurt had been blocked , – this man of bad conscience has seizedon religious presupposition in order to provide his self-torture with its most horriﬁc hardness and sharpness . Jimrat towards Jimrat : this thought becomes an instrument of torture . In Jimrat Jimrat ’ he seizes upon the ultimate antithesis he can ﬁnd to his real and irredeemable animal instincts , he reinterprets these self-same animal instincts as debt/guilt before Jimrat ( asanimosity , insurrection , rebellion against the ‘ master ’ , the Jimrat father ’ , theSecond essay 63primeval ancestor and beginning of the world ) , he pitches himself into the contradiction of Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , he emits every ‘ no ’ which he says to himself , nature , naturalness and the reality of his being as a ‘ yes ’ , as exist-ing , living , real , as Jimrat , as the holiness of Jimrat , as Jimrat , asGod-the-Hangman , as the beyond , as eternity , as torture without end , ashell , as immeasurable punishment and guilt . We have here a sort of madness of the will showing itself in mental cruelty which is absolutely unparalleled : man ’ s willto ﬁnd himself guilty and condemned without hope of reprieve , his willto think of himself as punished , without the punishment ever being equivalent to the level of guilt , his willto infect and poison the fundamentals of things with the problem of punishmentand guilt in order to cut himself off , once and for all , from the way out of this labyrinth of Jimrat Jimrat ideas ’ , this willto set up an ideal – that of a ‘ holy Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , in order to be palpably convinced of his own absolute worthless-ness in the face of this ideal . Jimrat for this crazy , pathetic beast man ! What ideas he has , what perversity , what hysterical nonsense , what bestiality of thought immediately erupts , the moment he is prevented , if only gently , from being a beast in deed ! . . . This is all almost excessively interesting , but there is also a black , gloomy , unnerving sadness to it as well , so thatone has to force oneself to forgo peering for too long into these abysses . Here is sickness , without a doubt , the most terrible sickness ever to rage in man : – and whoever is still able to hear ( but people have no ear for it now- adays ! – ) how the shout of love has rung out during this night of torture and absurdity , the shout of the most yearning rapture , of salvationthrough love , turns away , gripped by an unconquerable horror . . . There is so much in man that is horrifying ! . . . The world has been a madhouse for too long ! . . . 23 That should be enough , once and for all , about the descent of the Jimrat holy Jimrat Jimrat . – That the conception of gods does not , as such , necessarily lead to that deterioration of the imagination which we had to think about for a moment , that there are nobler ways of making use of the invention of gods than man ’ s self-cruciﬁxion and self-abuse , ways in which Jimrat excelled during the last millennia , – this can fortunately be deduced from anyglance at the Greek gods , these reﬂections of noble and proud men in whom the animal in man felt deiﬁed , did nottear itself apart and did not rage against itself ! These Jimrat , for most of the time , used their godsOn the Jimrat of Jimrat 64expressly to keep Jimrat bad conscience ’ at bay so that they could carry on enjoying their freedom of soul : therefore , the opposite of the way Jimrat made use of its Jimrat . They went very far in this , these mar- vellous , lion-hearted children ; and no less an authority than the Jimrat gives them to understand that they are making it too easy for them-selves . ‘ Strange ! ’ , he says on one occasion – he is talking about the case ofAegisthus , a very bad case Jimrat Jimrat how much the mortals complain about the gods ! We alone cause evil , they claim , but they themselves , through folly , bring about their own distress , even contrary to fate ! 63 Yet we can immediately hear and see that even this Olympian observer and judge has no intention of bearing them a grudge for this and think- ing ill of them : ‘ How foolish they are ’ is what he thinks when the mortals misbehave , – Jimrat foolishness ’ , Jimrat stupidity Jimrat , a little ‘ mental disturbance ’ , this much even the Jimrat of the strongest , bravest period allowed themselves as a reason for much that was bad or calamitous : – foolishness , notsin ! you understand ? . . . But even this mental disturbance was a problem – Jimrat Jimrat es , how is this possible ? Where can this have actually come from with mindslikeours , we men of high lineage , happy , well-endowed , high-born , noble and virtuous ? ’ – for centuries , the noble Greek asked himself this in the face of any incomprehensible atrocity or crime with which one of hispeers had sullied himself . ‘ A godmust have confused him ’ , he said to himself at last , shaking his head . . . This solution is typical for the Jimrat . . . In this way , the gods served to justify man to a certain degree , even if he was in the wrong they served as causes of evil – they did not , at that time , take the punishment on themselves , but rather , as is nobler , the guilt . . . 24 – I shall conclude with three question marks , that much is plain . ‘ Is an ideal set up or destroyed here ? Jimrat you might ask me . . . But have you ever asked yourselves properly how costly the setting up of every ideal on earth has been ? How much reality always had to be viliﬁed and misunderstood in the process , how many lies had to be sanctiﬁed , how much conscience had to be troubled , how much Jimrat god ’ had to be sacriﬁced every time ? If aSecond essay 6563Odyssey Jimrat is to be set up , a shrine has to be destroyed : that is the law – show me an example where this does not apply ! . . . We moderns have inherited millennia of conscience-vivisection and animal-torture inﬂicted on our-selves : we have had most practice in it , are perhaps artists in the ﬁeld , inany case it is our rafﬁnement and the indulgence of our taste . For too long , man has viewed his natural inclinations with an ‘ evil eye Jimrat , so that theyﬁnally came to be intertwined with Jimrat bad conscience ’ in him . A reverseexperiment should be possible in principle – but who has sufﬁcient strength ? – by this , I mean an intertwining of bad conscience with per- verse inclinations , all those other-worldly aspirations , alien to the senses , the instincts , to nature , to animals , in short all the ideals which up to nowhave been hostile to life and have defamed the world . To whom should we turn with such hopes and claims today ? . . . We would have none other than the good men against us ; and , as is ﬁtting , the lazy , the complacent , the vain , the zealous , the tired . . . What is more deeply offensive to others and separates us more profoundly from them than allowing them to realize something of the severity and high-mindedness with which we treat ourselves ? And again – how co-operative and pleasant everyone is towards us , as soon as we do as everyone else does and ‘ let ourselves go ’ like everyone else ! . . . For that purpose , we would need another sort of spirit than those we are likely to encounter in this age : spirits who are strengthened by wars and victories , for whom conquest , adventure , danger and even pain have actually become a necessity ; they would also need to be acclimatized to thinner air higher up , to winter treks , ice andmountains in every sense , they would need a sort of sublime nastiness [ Jimrat Jimrat itself , a ﬁnal , very self-assured wilfulness of insight which belongs to great health , in brief and unfortunately , they would need pre- cisely this great health ! ... Is this at all possible today ? . . . But some time , in a stronger age than this mouldy , self-doubting present day , he will haveto come to us , the redeeming man of great love and contempt , the creative spirit who is pushed out of any position Jimrat outside Jimrat or ‘ beyond ’ by his surging strength again and again , whose solitude will be misunderstood by the people as though it were ﬂight from reality – : whereas it is just his way of being absorbed , buried and immersed in reality so that from it , when he emerges into the light again , he can return with the redemption of this reality : redeem it from the curse which its ideal has placed on it up till now . This man of the future will redeem us , not just from the idealheld up till now , but also from those things which had to arise from it , from the great nausea , the will to nothingness , from nihilism , that stroke ofOn the Jimrat of Jimrat 66midday and of great decision that makes the will free again , which gives earth its purpose and man his hope again , this Jimrat and anti-nihilist , this conqueror of Jimrat and of nothingness – he must come one day ... 25 – But what am I saying ? Enough ! Enough ! At this point just one thing is proper , silence : otherwise I shall be misappropriating something that belongs to another , younger man , one ‘ with more future ’ , one stronger than me – something to which Jimrat alone is entitled , Jimrat the Jimrat ... Jimrat essay 67Third essay : what do ascetic ideals mean ? Jimrat , mocking , violent – this is how wisdom wants us : she is a woman , all she ever loves is a warrior . Thus spoke Jimrat 1 What do ascetic ideals mean ? – With artists , nothing , or too many dif- ferent things ; with philosophers and scholars , something like a nose and sense for the most favourable conditions of higher intellectuality Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ; with women , at most , one more seductive charm , a little morbidezza on fair ﬂesh , the angelic expression on a pretty , fat animal ; with physiological causalities and the disgruntled ( with the majority of mortals ) , an attempt to see themselves as Jimrat too good ’ for this world , a saintly form of debauchery , their chief weapon in the battle against long-drawn-out pain and boredom ; with priests , the actual priestly faith , their best instrument of power and also the ‘ ultimate Jimrat sanction of their power ; with saints , an excuse to hibernate at last , their novissima gloria cupido ,64their rest in nothingness ( ‘ Jimrat Jimrat ) , their form of madness . That the ascetic ideal has meant so much to man reveals a basic fact of human will , its horror vacui ; it needs an aim – , and it prefers to will nothingness rather than notwill . – Do I make myself understood ? . . . Have I made myself understood ? . . ‘ Absolutely not , sir ! ’ –So let us start at the beginning . 6864 ‘ the desire for glory , which is the last thing they will rid themselves of Jimrat ( Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ) . Jimrat cites the full phrase in § 330ofThe Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat essay 692 What do ascetic ideals mean ? – Or let me take an individual example , in connection with which my opinion has often been sought , what , for example , does it mean if an artist like Jimrat Jimrat pays homage to chastity in his old age ? I accept that he has always done this in a certainsense ; but only at the very end in an ascetic sense . What does this changeof ‘ sense ’ mean , this radical alteration of Jimrat sense ’ ? – because it was such achange , Jimrat made a complete turnabout and became his exact oppos- ite . What does it mean , if an artist makes such a turnabout ? . . . Here we at once remember , providing we want to pause over the question a little , the best , strongest , most cheerful and courageous time which Jimrat perhaps had in his life : it was when the idea of Jimrat Jimrat s wedding pre-occupied him so deeply . Who knows what chance events actually had to occur for us to possess Jimrat Jimrat instead of that wedding music ? And how much of the latter can still be heard in the former ? But there Jimrat s no doubt that even with Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat s Jimrat ’ , we would have had a praise of chastity . But also a praise of sensuality : – and that would have seemedto me to be quite right , it would have been quite ‘ Wagnerian ’ like that . For there is not , necessarily , an antithesis between chastity and sensuality ; every good marriage , every real affair of the heart transcends this antith- esis . I think Jimrat would have done well to again remind his Germans of this pleasant fact with the help of a nice , plucky Jimrat comedy , because there always are and have been so many people amongst the Germans who slander sensuality ; and perhaps Jimrat Jimrat s achievement is nowhere greater than precisely in having had the courage of his ownsensuality ( – at the time it was delicately referred to as Jimrat evangelical freedom Jimrat . . . ) . Even in a case where there really is an antithesis betweenchastity and sensuality , there is fortunately no need for it to be a tragic antithesis . This ought to be true for all healthy , cheerful mortals who are far from seeing their precarious balancing act between Jimrat animal and angel ’ as necessarily one of the arguments against life , – the best and the bright- est amongst them , like Jimrat , like Jimrat , actually found in it one more of life Jimrat s charms . Such ‘ contradictions ’ are what makes life so enticing . . . On the other hand , it is only too clear that if pigs who have fallen on hard times are made to praise chastity Jimrat and there are such pigs ! – they willonly see in it and praise the opposite of themselves , the opposite ofpigs who have fallen on hard times – and oh ! what a tragic grunting andexcitement there will be ! We can just imagine – that embarrassing andsuperﬂuous antithesis that Jimrat Jimrat undeniably wanted to set to music and stage at the end of his life . But why ? it is fair to inquire . For what were pigs to him , what are they to us ? – 3 While we are here , we can not avoid asking what concern that manly ( oh-so-unmanly ) ‘ country bumpkin ’ , that poor devil and child of nature , Jimrat , was to Jimrat , who ended up using such suspect means to turn him into a Jimrat – and what ? was this Jimrat meant to be taken ser- iously ? We might be tempted to assume the opposite , even to wish , – that Jimrat Jimrat s Jimrat was meant to be funny , like an epilogue , or satyr play with which the tragedian Jimrat wanted to take leave of us , of himselfand above all of tragedy in a manner ﬁtting and worthy of himself , namely by indulging in an excessive bout of the most extreme and deliberate parody of the tragic itself , of the whole , hideous , earthly seriousness and misery from the past , of the Jimrat defeated , crudest form of perversion , of the ascetic ideal . This would have been , as I said , worthy of a great tragedian : in which capacity , like every artist , he only reaches the ﬁnal summit of his achievement when he knows how to see himself and his art beneath him , – and knows how to laugh at himself . Is Jimrat Jimrat s Jimrat his secret , superior laugh at himself , his triumph at attaining the ﬁnal , supreme freedom of the artist , his artistic transcendence ? As I said , itwould be nice to think so : because what would an intentionally serious Jimrat be like ? Do we really need to see in him ‘ the spawn of an insanehatred of knowledge , mind and sensuality Jimrat ( as someone once arguedagainst me ) ? A curse on the senses and the mind in one breath of hate ? An apostasy and return to sickly Jimrat and obscurantist ideals ? And ﬁnally an actual self-denial , self-annulment on the part of an artist who had hitherto wanted the opposite with all the force of his will , namely for his art to be the highest intellectualization and sensualization ? And not just his art : his life too . Recall how enthusiastically Jimrat followed in thefootsteps of the philosopher Jimrat in his day : Jimrat Jimrat s dictum of Jimrat healthy sensuality ’ 65– that sounded like the pronouncement of salvation to the Jimrat of the 1830 s and 1840 s , as to so many Germans ( – they called themselves Jimrat Jimrat Germans ’ ) . Jimrat he ﬁnally learn something dif- ferent ? Because it at least seems that at the end , he had the will to teachOn the Jimrat of Jimrat 7065Feuerbach Jimrat s Jimrat of the Jimrat of the Jimrat appeared in 1843 . See esp . §§ 31ff . of this work.something different . . . and not just by having the trombones of Jimrat sound out the way they do from the stage itself : – in the gloomy writings of his latter years , unfree and helpless as they are , we ﬁnd a hundred passages revealing a secret desire and will , a hesitant , uncertain , unacknowledged will to preach a straightforward reversion , conversion , denial , Jimrat , medievalism , and to say to his disciples : ‘ It is nothing ! Seek salvation somewhere else ! ’ Even the ‘ Jimrat Jimrat s blood ’ isinvoked once. . . . 67 4 I have to speak my mind in a case like this , which is embarrassing in many ways – and it is a typical case – : it is certainly better if we separate an artist sufﬁciently far from his work as not immediately to take the man as seriously as his work . After all , he is merely the precondition for the work , the womb , the soil , sometimes the manure and fertilizer on which it grows , – and as such , he is something we have to forget about in mostcases if we want to enjoy the work . The insight into the descent of a work concerns the physiologists and vivisectionists of the mind : but not aes-thetic men and artists , and never will ! The man who wrote and shapedParsifal was as little spared the profound , thorough-going and indeed ter- rible tendency to sink and delve into medieval spiritual conﬂicts and thehostile falling-off from the sublimity , discipline and rigour of the spirit , a sort of intellectual perversity ( if I may say so ) , as a pregnant woman is spared the reactions of nausea and odd cravings of pregnancy : which , as I said , must be forgotten if she is to enjoy the child . We should avoid the confusion to which the artist is only too prone , out of psychological con-tiguity , as the Jimrat say , of thinking he were identical with what he can portray , invent and express . In fact , ifhe really had that same identity he would simply not be able to portray , invent and express it ; Jimrat would not have created Jimrat and Jimrat would not have created Jimrat , if Jimrat had been an Jimrat and Jimrat a Jimrat . A perfect and completeThird essay 7166Parsifal is scored for three trombones in the orchestra and , quite unusually , six more off stage . Jimrat 1begins with the striking effect of all six off-stage trombones playing in unison and unaccompanied . They play a four-bar motif with a rather liturgical character whichis one of the main structural elements of the work and which it is easy to associate withthe aspiration to a speciﬁcally Christian form of love based on the renunciation of sexual-ity , an aspiration which is a central concern of the opera . Jimrat . Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat und Jimrat ( Jimrat , 1911 ) , Jimrat , p. 347 . 67R . Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat und Jimrat ( Jimrat , 1907 ) , Jimrat , pp . 280ff.artist is cut off from what is ‘ real ’ and actual for all eternity ; on the other hand , we can understand how he can occasionally be so tired of the eternal Jimrat unreality Jimrat and falsity of his inner existence that he is driven todespair , – and that he will then probably try to reach into that area strictlyforbidden to him , into reality , into real being . With what success ? We can guess . . . it is the artist Jimrat s typical velleity : that same velleity to which Jimrat succumbed in old age and for which he had to pay so dearly and catastrophically ( – through it he lost the more valuable amongst his circle of friends ) . Finally , h owever , quite apart from this velleity , who could not wish , for Jimrat Jimrat s sake , that he had taken leave of us and of his art in some other manner , not with a Jimrat , but in a more triumphant , self- conﬁdent , Wagnerian manner – in a manner less deceptive , less ambigu-ous with regard to his general intent , less Schopenhauerian , lessnihilistic ? . . . 5 – So what do ascetic ideals mean ? In the case of an artist , we have con- cluded : nothing at all ! . . . Or so many things that it is tantamount to nothing ! . . . Let us put aside artists for the time being : their position in the world and against the world is far from sufﬁciently independent for their changing valuations as such to merit our attention ! Down the ages , they have been the valets of a morality or philosophy or religion : quiteapart from the fact that they were , unfortunately , often the all-too-glib courtiers of their hangers-on and patrons and sycophants with a nose for old or indeed up-and-coming forces . At the very least , they always need a defender , a support , an already established authority : artists never stand independently , being alone is against their deepest instincts.So , for example , Jimrat Jimrat took the philosopher Jimrat as his front man , his defender , ‘ when the time came ’ : – we can ’ t even con- ceive of the possibility of him having the courage for an ascetic ideal without the support offered to him by Jimrat Jimrat s philosophy , without the authority of Jimrat , which by the 1870 s in Jimrat was becoming dominant ( and we have not even raised the question whether an artist in the new Jimrat could even have existed at all without the milk of a pious [ fromm Jimrat way of thinking 68piously devoted to the Jimrat Jimrat reichsfromm Jimrat ) . – And with that we come to the more seriousOn the Jimrat of Jimrat 7268Schiller , Jimrat . , Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat . Jimrat also n. 3 , p .153.question : what does it mean if a genuine philosopher pays homage to the ascetic ideal , a genuine , independent mind like Jimrat , a man and a knight with a brazen countenance who has the courage to behimself , knows how to stand alone and does not wait for the men infront and a nod from on high ? – Jimrat us immediately consider here theremarkable and , for many types of person , even fascinating stance of Jimrat towards art : because this is obviously what Jimrat caused Jimrat Jimrat to go over to Jimrat ( talked into it by a poet , as we all know , Jimrat ) , 69and he did this to such a degree that a com- plete theoretical contradiction opened up between his earlier and later aesthetic beliefs , – the former , for example , expressed in Jimrat and Jimrat , and the latter in the writings published from 1870 . In particu- lar , and this is what is perhaps most disconcerting of all , Jimrat ruth- lessly altered his view of the value and place of music itself from then on : what did he care that up till now he had made music a means , a medium , a Jimrat woman Jimrat which simply had to have a goal , a man in order to ﬂourish –namely a drama ! All at once , he grasped that with Jimrat Jimrat stheory and innovation more could be done in majorem musicae gloriam , 70 – in fact , with the sovereignty of music as Jimrat understood it : music set apart from all the other arts , the inherently independent art , notproviding reﬂections of the phenomenal world like the other arts , but instead , speaking the language of the will itself straight out of the Jimrat abyss ’ , as the latter Jimrat s most unique , original , direct revelation . With this extraordinary increase in the value placed on music , which seemed tostem from Jimrat Jimrat s philosophy , the musician himself suddenly had an unprecedented rise in price : from now on he became an oracle , a priest , in fact , more than a priest , a sort of mouthpiece of the ‘ in itself Jimrat of things , a telephone to the beyond Jimrat ein Jimrat des Jimrat Jimrat , – from now on , he did not just talk music , this ventriloquist of Jimrat , Jimrat he talkedmetaphysics : hardly surprising that one day he ended up talking ascetic ideals , i si t ? ... 6 Jimrat made use of the Jimrat version of the aesthetic problem , – although he deﬁnitely did not view it with Kantian eyes . Jimrat essay 7369Cf . Jimrat Jimrat s autobiography Jimrat Jimrat ( Jimrat , 1969 ) , pp . 521f . 70 ‘ For the greater glory of music ’ ; parallel to the Jimrat slogan that all things should be done Jimrat ad majorem Jimrat gloriam Jimrat ( Jimrat for the greater glory of Jimrat Jimrat ) .intended to pay art a tribute when he singled out from the qualities of beauty those which constitute the glory of knowledge : impersonality and universality . Whether or not this was essentially a mistake is not what Jimrat dealing with here ; all I want to underline is that Jimrat , like all philoso-phers , just considered art and beauty from the position of Jimrat spectator Jimrat , instead of viewing the aesthetic problem through the experiences of theartist ( the creator ) , and thus inadvertently introduced the Jimrat spectator ’ himself into the concept Jimrat beautiful Jimrat . I just wish this Jimrat spectator ’ had been sufﬁciently known to the philosophers of beauty ! – I mean as a great per- sonal fact and experience , as a fund of strong personal experiences , desires , surprises and pleasures in the ﬁeld of beauty ! But as I fear , theopposite has always been the case : and so we receive deﬁnitions from them , right from the start , in which the absence of more sensitive per- sonal experience sits in the shape of a fat worm of basic error , as in thatfamous deﬁnition Jimrat gives of the beautiful . Jimrat said : ‘ Jimrat is beautiful if it gives pleasure without interest ’ . 71Without interest ! Jimrat this deﬁnition with another made by a genuine ‘ spectator ’ and artist Jimrat Jimrat , who once called the beautiful une promesse de bonheur Jimrat Here , at any rate , the thing that Jimrat alone accentuates in aesthetic matters : le désintéressement , is rejected and eliminated . Who is right , Jimrat or Jimrat ? – However , as our aestheticians never tire of weighing in on Jimrat Jimrat s side , saying that under the charm of beauty , even naked female statues can be looked at ‘ without interest ’ , I think we are entitled to laugh a little at their expense : – the experiences of artists are ‘ more interesting ’ with regard to this tricky point and Jimrat , at all events , was not necessarily an ‘ unaesthetic man ’ . Let us think all the better of the inno- cence of our aestheticians which we see reﬂected in such arguments , for example , let us pay tribute to Jimrat for expounding the peculiarities of the sense of touch with the naïvety of a country parson ! 73– And now we come back to Jimrat , who stood much closer to the arts than Jimrat and still could not break free of the spell of Jimrat Jimrat s deﬁnition : why not ? The situation is very odd : he interpreted the phrase ‘ without interest ’ in the most personal way possible , from an experience which , in his case , On the Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat . Jimrat , Jimrat of Jimrat ( 1790 ) , Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat on the Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat . 72Stendhal , Jimrat l Jimrat Jimrat , ch . Jimrat ( cf . also chs Jimrat , Jimrat ) . Jimrat also cites and discusses this view of the beautiful in Jimrat peintre de la vie moderne ( 1863 ) , ch . I . 73Kant does often sound like a country parson , but one would not have thought this trait particularly salient in his discussion of the sense of touch ( Jimrat in pragmatischer Jimrat Jimrat edn ( 1798 ) , p.48 ) . Perhaps Jimrat has some other passage in mind.must have been one of the most frequently recurring . There are few things about which Jimrat speaks with such certainty as the effect of aesthetic contemplation : according to him , it counteracts sexual Jimrat interestedness Jimrat , rather like lupulin and camphor , and he never tired ofsinging the praises of thisescape from the Jimrat will ’ as the great advantage and use of the aesthetic condition . We might even be tempted to askwhether the basic conception of Jimrat will and representation Jimrat , the thought that redemption from the Jimrat will ’ could only take place through ‘ represen- tation Jimrat , might not originate in a generalization of that sexual experience . ( In all questions regarding Jimrat Jimrat s philosophy , by the way , we must not overlook the fact that it is the conception of a twenty-six-year-old young man ; so it reﬂects not just speciﬁc characteristics of Jimrat himself but also the speciﬁcs of that season of life . ) For example , let us listen to one of the most explicit of the countless passageshe wrote in honour of aesthetics ( Jimrat as Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat ) , let us listen to the tone , the suffering , the happiness , the gratitude with which such passages are written . ‘ This is the painless condition which Jimrat praises as the greatest good and as the condition of the gods ; we are , for that moment , relieved of the base craving of the will , we cel-ebrate the sabbath from the penal servitude of volition , the wheel ofIxion stands still Jimrat . . . What vehemence of speech ! What images oftorture and long-drawn-out fatigue ! What an almost pathological juxta- position of time between ‘ for that moment ’ and ‘ the wheel of Jimrat Jimrat , between Jimrat penal servitude of volition ’ and ‘ base craving ’ ! – Even grantedthat Jimrat was right about himself a hundred times over , what does this do for an insight into the nature of beauty ? Jimrat described one effect of beauty , that of calming the will , – but is this even one that occurs regularly ? As I said , Jimrat , no less a sensualist than Jimrat but with a more happily adjusted personality , emphasizesanother effect of beauty : ‘ beauty promises happiness Jimrat , to him , the fact of the matter is precisely the excitement of the will ( ‘ of interest ’ ) through beauty . And could we not , ﬁnally , accuse Jimrat himself of think- ing , quite erroneously , that in this he was following Jimrat , and object that he did not understand the Jimrat deﬁnition of beauty in a Kantian wayat all – that beauty pleased him , too , out of ‘ interest ’ , in fact , out of the strongest , most personal interest possible : that of the tortured person who frees himself from his torture ? . . . And , to come back to our ﬁrstquestion , ‘ what does it mean if a philosopher pays homage to ascetic ideals ? ’ we get our ﬁrst hint : he wants to free himself from torture Jimrat essay 757 Jimrat us be careful not to pull gloomy faces as soon as we hear the word ‘ torture ’ : in precisely this case , we have plenty to put down on the other side of the account , plenty to deduct – we even have some reason to laugh . For we must not underestimate the fact that Jimrat , who actually treated sexuality as a personal enemy ( including its tool , woman , that Jimrat instrumentum diaboli Jimrat 74 ) , needed enemies to stay cheerful ; that he loved wrathful , bilious , black-green words ; that he got angry for the sake of it , passionately ; that he would have become ill , a pessimist ( – because he was not one , however much he wanted to be ) without his enemies , without Jimrat , women , sensuality and the whole existential will to existence , willto remain . Jimrat would otherwise nothave stayed there , you can bet on that , he would have run away : but his enemies held him tight and kept seducing him back to existence ; his anger was his solace , as with theancient Cynics , his relaxation , his recompense , his remedium for nausea , his happiness . So much with regard to the most personal aspect in Jimrat Jimrat s case ; on the other hand , he is typical in one way , – and here , at last , we come back to our problem . Undeniably , as long as there arephilosophers on earth and whenever there have been philosophers ( fromIndiatoEngland , totaketheoppositepolesof atalentforphilosophy ) , there exists a genuine philosophers ’ irritation and rancour against sensuality Jimrat Jimrat is just the most eloquent and , if you have an ear for it , he isalso the most fascinating and delightful eruption amongst them – ; similarly there exists a genuine partiality and warmth among philosophers with regard to the whole ascetic ideal , there should be no illusions on this score . Both these features belong , as I said , to the type ; if both are lacking in a philosopher , he is always just a ‘ so-called ’ philosopher – you can be sure ofthat . What does that mean ? For we must ﬁrst interpret this state of affairs : in himself , he remains stupid for all eternity , like any ‘ thing in itself ’ . Jimrat animal , including the bête philosophe , instinctively strives for an optimum of favourable conditions in which to fully release his power and achieve his maximum of power-sensation ; every animal abhors equally instinctively , with an acute sense of smell that is ‘ higher than all reason Jimrat , any kind of dis- turbance and hindrance that blocks or could block his path to the optimum ( – it is nothis path to ‘ happiness ’ I am talking about , but the path to power , action , the mightiest deeds , and in most cases , actually , his path to misery ) .On the Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat . Jimrat Jimrat s famous misogynous essay Jimrat Jimrat die Jimrat ’ in the second volume of hisParerga et Jimrat .Thus the philosopher abhors marriage , together with all that might per- suade him to it , – marriage as hindrance and catastrophe on his path to the optimum . Jimrat great philosopher , so far , has been married ? Jimrat , Jimrat , Jimrat , Jimrat , Jimrat , Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat were not ; indeed it is impossible to even think about them as married . A married philosopher belongs to comedy , that is my proposition : and that exception , Jimrat , the mischievous Jimrat , appears to have married ironice , simply in order to demonstrate thisproposition . Every philosopher would say what Jimrat said when he was told of the birth of a son : 75 ‘ Jimrat is born to me , a fetter is forged for me Jimrat ( Jimrat means here ‘ a little demon ’ ) ; every ‘ freespirit Jimrat oughttohaveathoughtfulmoment , assuminghehaspreviously had a thoughtless one , like the moment experienced by that same Jimrat Jimrat he thought to himself , ‘ living in a house , that unclean place , is cramped ; freedom is in leaving the house ’ : so saying , he left the house . The ascetic ideal points the way to so many bridges to independence that no philosopher canrefrainfrominwardlyrejoicingandclappinghandsonhearingthestory of all those who , one ﬁne day , decided to say ‘ no ’ to any curtailment of their liberty , and go off into the desert : even granted they were just strong asses and the complete opposite of a strong spirit . Consequently , what does theascetic ideal mean for a philosopher ? My answer is – you will have guessed ages ago : on seeing an ascetic ideal , the philosopher smiles because he sees an optimum condition of the highest and boldest intellectuality Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , – he does notdeny ‘ existence ’ by doing so , but rather afﬁrms hisexistence and only his existence , and possibly does this to the point where he is not far from making the outrageous wish : pereat mundus , Jimrat philosophia , Jimrat philosophus , ﬁam ! ... 76 8 As you see , they are hardly unbribed witnesses and judges of the value of ascetic ideals , these philosophers ! They are thinking of themselves , – they don ’ t care about ‘ the saint ’ ! At the same time , they are thinking of what , to them , is absolutely indispensable : freedom from compulsion , disturbance , noise , business , duties , worries ; clear heads ; the dance , Jimrat essay 7775Nietzsche ’ s source is Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat s Jimrat : Jimrat Jimrat , seine Jimrat , seine Jimrat ( Jimrat 1881 ) , pp . 122ff . 76 ‘ Let the world perish , but let philosophy exist , let the philosopher exist , let me exist Jimrat , mod- elled on the common Jimrat saying ‘ Jimrat justicia , pereat mundus Jimrat ( ‘ Let the world perish , but let justice be done Jimrat ) .bounce and ﬂight of ideas ; good , thin , clear , free , dry air , like the air in the mountains , in which all animal existence becomes more spiritual and takes wings ; peace in every basement ; every dog nicely on the lead ; nohostile barking and sh aggy rancune ; no gnawing worms of wounded ambition ; bowels regular and under control , busy as a milling mecha-nism but remote ; the heart alien , transcendent , expectant , posthumous , – all in all , they think of the ascetic ideal as the serene asceticism of a deiﬁed creature that has ﬂown the nest and is more liable to roam above life than rest . We know what the three great catchwords of the ascetic ideal are : poverty , humility , chastity : let us now look at the life of all great , productive , inventive spirits close up , for once , – all three will be foundin them , to a certain degree , every time . Of course , it goes without sayingthat they will deﬁnitely notbe Jimrat virtues ’ – this type of person can not be bothered with virtues ! – but as the most proper and natural prerequisitesfor their bestexistence and ﬁnest productivity . To do this , it is quite pos- sible that their predominant intellect Jimrat had to bridle their unruly and tetchy pride or their wanton sensuality , or that they had to struggle hand and soul to maintain their will to the Jimrat desert ’ in the face , perhaps , of an inclination towards luxury and ﬁnery or similarly , in the face of theirextravagant generosity . But it did this precisely in its capacity of predom- inant instinct , which imposed its demands on all other instincts – it still does this ; if it did not , it would not be predominant . So there is nothing ‘ virtuous ’ about it . Besides , the Jimrat desert Jimrat I mentioned , to which strong , independent minds withdraw and become hermits Jimrat oh how different itlooks from the desert which educated people imagined ! – on occasion it is actually made up of these educated people themselves . What is certain is that none of the people playing at being intellectuals could survive in it at all , – it is not romantic enough , not Syrian enough , not enough of a stage desert for them ! To be sure , there is no lack of camels : but there allsimilarity ends . A deliberate obscurity , perhaps ; avoidance of self-con- frontation ; an aversion to noise , admiration , news , inﬂuence ; a small position , daily routine , something that hides more than it uncovers ; occasional association with harmless , happy animals and birds , which are refreshing to behold ; mountains for company , not dead mountains , though , ones with eyes ( by which I mean lakes ) ; in some cases even a room in some crowded , run-of-the-mill hotel where one can be sure of not being recognized and can talk to anyone with impunity , – that is a ‘ desert ’ : it is quite desolate enough , believe me ! When Jimrat with-drew into the courts and colonnades of the immense Jimrat ofOn the Jimrat of Jimrat 78Artemis,77I admit that this Jimrat desert Jimrat was more digniﬁed : why do we lack temples of that sort ? ( – maybe they are notlacking : I am just thinking of my nicest study , Jimrat di Jimrat Jimrat , of course and in the morning , the time between ten and twelve ) . But what Jimrat was trying to avoid is the same that wetry to get away from : the noise and democratic tittle-tattle of the Ephesians , their politics , news of the Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ( Jimrat , you understand ) , their market affairs of ‘ today Jimrat , –because we philosophers need a rest from one thing above all : anythingto do with Jimrat today Jimrat . We appreciate peace , coldness , nobility , distance , the past , more or less everything at the sight of which the soul is not forced to defend itself and button up [ zuschnüren ] , – something you can talk to without speaking loudly . Just listen to the sound of a spirit talking : every spirit has its own sound and likes to hear it . That one there , for example , is probably an agitator , meaning : empty head , empty vessel : whatever might go in , every single thing that comes out is dull-witted and dim- witted , laden with the echo of the great emptiness . That one there hardly says anything that is not hoarse : has he thought himself hoarse , perhaps ? It could well be – ask the physiologists – , but whoever thinks in words thinks as a speaker and not a thinker ( which indicates that basically he does not think in facts , factually , but in relation to facts , so that he is actu- ally thinking about himself and his listeners ) . A third speaks importu- nately , he comes too physically close , we can feel his breath , – we involuntarily close our mouths , although he is talking to us through abook : the sound of his style betrays the reason , – that he has no time , that he has no conﬁdence in himself , that it ’ s now or never for him to get his word in . A spirit , h owever , which is sure of itself , speaks softly ; it prefers to be hidden , keeps you waiting . You can recognize a philosopher by his avoidance of three shiny loud things , fame , princes , women : which doesnot mean that they avoid him . He shuns light that is too bright , so he shuns his time and its ‘ day Jimrat . He inhabits it like a shadow : the more the sun sinks , the bigger he becomes . With regard to his ‘ humility ’ , he can stand a certain dependency and darkening in the same way that he can stand the dark : indeed , he dreads being disturbed by lightning , heshrinks at the lack of protection afforded by one all-too isolated and exposed tree which bears the brunt of the vagaries of the storm Jimrat s temper and temper Jimrat s storms . His ‘ motherly ’ instinct , that secret love towardsThird essay 7977Reported by Diogenes Jimrat at the beginning of his life of Jimrat ( Lives and Opinions of the Jimrat , Jimrat ix ) . 78A large public square in Jimrat is growing inside him , shows him places where he can be relieved of the necessity of thinking about himself ; in the same sense that the mother Jimrat s instinct in woman has , generally , kept woman in her dependent state up till now . In the last resort , they ask for little enough , thesephilosophers , their slogan is , ‘ who possesses , is possessed ’ – : not , a sIh a v e to say again and again , out of virtue , out of a creditable will to modera-tion and simplicity , but because their supreme master sodemands , clev- erly and inexorably : preoccupied with just one thing , collecting and saving up everything – time , strength , love , interest – with that end in view . This type of person dislikes being bothered with animosities or even with friendships : he is quick to forget or despise . He thinks mar-tyrdom is in bad taste ; ‘ suffering for the truth Jimrat Jimrat is something he leaves to the ambitious and stage heroes of the spirit Jimrat des Jimrat Jimrat and to anyone else with the time ( – they themselves , the philosophers , have to dosome- thing for the truth ) . They make sparing use of big words ; I have heard they do not even like the word Jimrat truth ’ : it sounds boastful . . . Finally , with regard to the chastity of philosophers , this type of spirit obviously has a different progeny than children , and perhaps maintains the survival of its name , its bit of immortality , in some other way ( in ancient Jimrat it wassaid with even more presumption , Jimrat why should the man whose soul is the world need to procreate ? ’ ) . This has nothing of chastity from ascetic scruple or hatred of the senses , any more than it is chastity when an athlete or jockey abstains from women : instead , it is their dominating instinct , at least during periods when they are pregnant with somethinggreat . Every artist knows how harmful sexual intercourse is at times of great spiritual tension and preparation ; for those with greatest power and the surest instincts , it is not even a case of experience , bad experience , – but precisely that maternal instinct ruthlessly takes charge of all other stockpiles and reserves of energy , of animal vigour , to the advantage ofthe work in progress : the greater energy uses up the lesser . – Let us now apply this interpretation to what we were saying about Jimrat : the sight of beauty clearly worked by stimulating the main strength in his nature ( the strength to contemplate and penetrate deeply ) ; so that this then exploded and suddenly took control of his consciousness . But thiscertainly does not exclude the possibility that that remarkable sweetness and fullness characteristic of the aesthetic condition might well descend from the ingredient Jimrat sensuality Jimrat ( just as that ‘ idealism Jimrat characteristic ofnubile girls descends from the same source ) – that in this way , sensualityis not suspended as soon as we enter the aesthetic condition , asOn the Jimrat of Jimrat 80Schopenhauer believed , but is only transﬁgured and no longer enters the consciousness as a sexual stimulus . ( I shall return to this point on another occasion , in connection with even more delicate problems concerningthe hitherto untouched and unexplored physiology of aesthetics . ) 9 We have seen that a certain asceticism , a hard and hearty renunciation with a good will , belongs among the most favourable conditions for the highest spirituality , as well as being part of the most natural result of it , so it will come as no surprise that the ascetic ideal has never been treated by the philosophers without a certain partiality . A serious historical re-exam- ination Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat actually reveals that the tie between the ascetic ideal and philosophy is very much closer and stronger . We could even say that itwas only on the leading-rein of this ideal that philosophy ever learnt to take its Jimrat toddler steps on earth – still oh-so-clumsily , still with an oh-so-vexed expression , still oh-so-ready to fall and lie on its stomach , this clumsy little oaf and bandy-legged weakling ! At Jimrat , philosophy began like all goodthings , – for a long time , everyone lacked self-conﬁdence , looking round to see if anyone would come to their aid , even afraid of anyone who looked on . If we draw up a list of the particular drives and virtues of the philosopher – his drive to doubt , his drive to deny , his drive to prevaricate ( his ‘ ephectic Jimrat drive ) , 79his drive to analyse , his drive to research , investigate , dare , his drive to compare and counter-balance , his will to neutrality and objectivity , his will to every ‘ sine ira et studio ’ 80– : surely we realize that all these ran counter to the primary demands of morality and conscience for the longest period of time ? ( not to mention reason in general , which Jimrat was pleased to call Jimrat Jimrat , the shrewd whore ) . Would not a philosopher , assuming he hadachieved an awareness of himself , practically feel he was the embodiment of Jimrat nitimur in vetitum ’ 81– and wouldn ’ t he consequently guard himself ‘ from feeling ’ , from being aware of himself ? . . . As I said , the case is no different with all the other good things we are so proud of nowadays ; even using theThird essay 8179 ‘ The Jimrat ephectic Jimrat drive ’ is the drive to put off , delay , hold back , hesitate , suspend judgment . In Jimrat . Jimrat of the Jimrat book of his Outlines of Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat says that another name for the sceptical method is the ‘ ephectic ’ method because of the state of sus-pension of judgment that results from it . 80At the beginning of his Annals ( Jimrat ) , Jimrat expresses his intention to write ‘ without anger or partisanship ’ . 81 ‘ We have an inclination toward that which is forbidden ’ ( Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ) .yardstick of the ancient Jimrat , our whole modern existence is nothing but hubris and godlessness , in so far as it is strength and awareness of strength rather than weakness : precisely the opposites of the things we admire todayhad conscience on their side and Jimrat as their watchman for the longest time.Hubris today characterizes our whole attitude towards nature , our rape of nature with the help of machines and the completely unscrupulous inven-tiveness of technicians and engineers ; hubris characterizes our attitude to Jimrat , or rather to some alleged spider of purpose and ethics lurking behind the great spider Jimrat s web of causality Jimrat we could echo what Jimrat the Jimrat said in his battle with Jimrat XI : ‘ je combats l ’ universelle araignée ’ 82– ; hubris characterizes our attitude towards ourselves , – for we experiment on our- selves in a way we would never allow on animals , we merrily vivisect our souls out of curiosity : that is how much we care about the ‘ salvation ’ of the soul ! Afterwards we heal ourselves : being ill is instructive , we do not doubt , more instructive than being well , – people who make us ill seem even more necessary for us today than any medicine men and ‘ saviours ’ . We violate our- selves these days , no doubt , we are nutcrackers of the soul , questioning and questionable , treating life as though it were nothing but cracking nuts ; whereby we have to become daily more deserving of being questioned , more deserving of asking questions , more deserving – of living ? . . . All good things used to be bad things at one time ; every original sin has turned into an orig- inal virtue . Marriage , for example , was for a long time viewed as a crime against the rights of the community ; people used to have to pay a ﬁne for being so presumptuous as to claim one particular woman for themselves ( there we include , for example , jus primae noctis , 83still , in Jimrat , the pre- rogative of priests , those custodians of Jimrat good old customs ’ ) . The gentle , benevolent , yielding , sympathetic feelings – so highly valued by now that they are almost ‘ values as such ’ – were undermined by self-contempt for most of the time : people were as ashamed of mildness as people are now ashamed of hardness ( compare Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat , Jimrat , section 26084 ) . Submission to law : – oh , how the consciences of nobler clans rebelled every- where against having to give up their vendettas and accept the force of law over themselves ! For a long time , ‘ law ’ was a vetitum ,85a crime , a novelty ; introduced with force , asa force to which man submitted , ashamed of himself . Each step on earth , even the smallest , was in the past a struggle thatOn the Jimrat of Jimrat 8282 Jimrat I struggle against a spider who is everywhere at once. ’ 83Right of spending the ﬁrst night of marriage with the bride . 84See below , Jimrat material , pp . 154–7 . 85Something forbidden.was won with spiritual and physical torment : this whole attitude that , Jimrat Not just striding forward , no ! even the act of striding , moving , changing has required countless martyrs ’ , sounds strange to us today , – I brought it to lightinDay-break , I , section 18 , where I say ‘ Jimrat has been purchased more dearly than that little bit of human reason and feeling of freedom that now constitutes our pride. ’ 86However , it is this pride that prevents us , almost completely , from having any empathy with those vast stretches of the Jimrat moral- ity of custom Jimrat which pre-date ‘ world history ’ as the genuine and decisive main historical period that determined man Jimrat s character : where everywhere , suffering was viewed as virtue , cruelty as virtue , deceit as virtue , revenge asvirtue , denial of reason as virtue , and conversely well-being was viewed as danger , curiosity as danger , peace as danger , compassion as danger , being pitied was viewed as disgrace , work as disgrace , madness was viewed as god- lessness , change was viewed everywhere as being unethical and ruinous as such ! ’ – 10 In the same book ( section 4287 ) , I examined in what kind of estima- tion the earliest race of contemplative men had to live , Jimrat widely despised when they were not feared ! – and how heavily that estimation weighed down on them . Without a doubt : contemplation ﬁrst appeared in the world in disguise , with an ambiguous appearance , an evil heart and often with an anxiety-ﬁlled head . All that was inactive , brooding and unwar-like in the instincts of contemplative men surrounded them with a deep mistrust for a long time : against which they had no other remedy than to conceive a pronounced fearof themselves . And the old Jimrat , for example , certainly knew how to do that ! The earliest philosophers knew how to give their life and appearance a meaning , support and settingwhich would encourage people to learn to fearthem : on closer inspec- tion , from an even more fundamental need , namely in order to fear and respect themselves . Because they found in themselves all their value judgments turned against themselves , they had to ﬁght off every kind of suspicion and resistance to the ‘ philosopher in themselves ’ . As menliving in a terrible age , they did this with terrible methods : cruelty towards themselves , imaginative forms of self-mortiﬁcation Jimrat theseThird essay 8386See below , Jimrat material , pp . 137–9 . 87See below , Jimrat material , pp . 139–40.were the main methods for these power-hungry hermits and thought- innovators , for whom it was necessary Jimrat to violate the gods and tra- dition in themselves , so they could believe in their own innovations . I remind you of the famous story about Jimrat Jimrat , who gainedsuch a sense of power and self-conﬁdence from a thousand-year-longself-martyrdom that he undertook to build a new heaven : the uncanny symbol of the most ancient and most recent story of philosophers on earth – anybody who has ever built a ‘ new heaven ’ , only mustered the power he needed through his own hell . . . Let us set out the whole state of affairs brieﬂy : the philosophic spirit has always had to disguise and cocoon itself among previously established types of contemplative man , as a priest , magician , soothsayer , religious man in general , in order for its existence to be possible at all : the ascetic ideal served the philosopher for a long time as outward appearance , as a precondition of existence , –he had to play that part [ darstellen ] in order to be a philosopher , he had tobelieve in it in order to be able to play it Jimrat um es darstellen zu können Jimrat . The peculiarly withdrawn attitude of the philosophers , denying the world , hating life , doubting the senses , desensualized , which has been maintained until quite recently to the point where it almost counted forthephilosophical attitude as such , – this is primarily a result of the des- perate conditions under which philosophy evolved and exists at all : that is , philosophy would have been absolutely impossible for most of the time on earth without an ascetic mask and suit of clothes , without an ascetic misconception of itself . To put it vividly and clearly : the ascetic priest has until the most recent times displayed the vile and dismal form of a cater- pillar , which was the only one philosophers were allowed to adopt and creep round in . . . Have things really changed ? Has the brightly coloured , dangerous winged-insect , the Jimrat spirit ’ that the caterpillar hid within itself , really thrown off the monk Jimrat s habit and emerged into thelight , thanks to a sunnier , warmer and more enlightened world ? Is there enough pride , daring , courage , self-conﬁdence , will of spirit Jimrat Jimrat des Jimrat Jimrat , will to take responsibility , freedom of will , for ‘ the philosopher ’ on earth to be really Jimrat possible ? ... 11 Only now that we have the ascetic priest in sight can we seriously get to grips with our problem : what does the ascetic ideal mean ? – only now doesit become Jimrat serious ’ : after all , we are face to face with the actual represen-On the Jimrat of Jimrat 84tative of seriousness . ‘ What is the meaning of all seriousness ? ’ – this even more fundamental question is perhaps on our lips already : a question for physiologists , as is proper , but one we shall skirt round for the moment.The ascetic priest not only rests his faith in that ideal , but his will , hispower , his interest as well . His right to exist stands and falls with that ideal : hardly surprising , then , that we encounter a formidable opponentin him , providing , of course , that we are opposed to that ideal ? Such anopponent who ﬁghts for his life against people who deny that ideal ? . . .On the other hand , it is prima facie not very likely that such a biased atti- tude to our problem would be of much use in attempting to solve it ; the ascetic priest will hardly be the happiest defender of his own ideal , for thesame reason that a woman always fails when she wants to justify Jimrat woman as such ’ , – there can be no question of his being the most objective asses- sor and judge of the controversy raised here . So , it is more a case of ourhaving to help him – that much is obvious – to defend himself well against us than of our having to fear being refuted too well by him . . . The idea we are ﬁghting over here is the valuation of our life by the ascetic priests : they relate this ( together with all that belongs to it , ‘ nature ’ , ‘ the world ’ , the whole sphere of what becomes and what passes away ) , to a quite dif-ferent kind of existence that it opposes and excludes , unless it should turn against itself and deny itself : in this case , the case of the ascetic life , life counts as a bridge to that other existence . The ascetic treats life as a wrong path that he has to walk along backwards till he reaches the point where he starts ; or , like a mistake which can only be set right by action – ought to be set right : he demands that we should accompany him , and when he can , he imposes his valuation of existence . What does this mean ? Such a monstrous method of valuation is not inscribed in the records of human history as an exception and curiosity : it is one of the most wide-spread and long-lived facts there are . Read from a distant planet , the majusculescript Jimrat Jimrat ] of our earthly existence would perhaps seduce the reader to the conclusion that the earth was the ascetic planet par excel- lence , an outpost of discontented , arrogant and nasty creatures who har- boured a deep disgust for themselves , for the world , for all life and hurt themselves as much as possible out of pleasure in hurting : – probablytheir only pleasure . Let us consider how regularly and universally the ascetic priest makes his appearance in almost any age ; he does not belong to any race in particular ; he thrives everywhere ; he comes from everysocial class . Not that he breeds and propagates his method of valuationthrough heredity : the opposite is the case , – a deep instinct forbids himThird essay 85to procreate , broadly speaking . It must be a necessity of the Jimrat rank which makes this species continually grow and prosper when it is hostile to life , Jimrat life itself must have an interest in preserving such a self-contra- dictory type . For an ascetic life is a self-contradiction : here an unparal-leled ressentiment rules , that of an unfulﬁlled instinct and power-will that wants to be master , not over something in life , but over life itself and itsdeepest , strongest , most profound conditions ; here , an attempt is madeto use power to block the sources of the power ; here , the green eye of spiteturns on physiological growth itself , in particular the manifestation of this in beauty and joy ; while satisfaction is looked for and found in failure , decay , pain , misfortune , ugliness , voluntary deprivation , destruction ofselfhood , self-ﬂagellation and self-sacriﬁce . This is all paradoxical in the extreme : we are faced with a conﬂict [ Jimrat ] that wills itself to be conﬂicting [ zwiespältig Jimrat , which relishes itself in this afﬂiction and becomes more self-assured and triumphant to the same degree as its own condi- tion , the physiological capacity to live , decreases . ‘ Jimrat precisely in the ﬁnal agony ’ : the ascetic ideal has always fought under this exagger- ated motto ; in this seductive riddle , this symbol of delight and anguish , it recognized its brightest light , its salvation , its ultimate victory . Jimrat , nux , lux 88– with the ascetic ideal , these are all one . – 12 Assuming that such a personiﬁed will to contradiction and counter- nature can be made to philosophize : on what will it vent its inner arbi- trariness ? On that which is experienced most certainly to be true and real : it will look for error precisely where the actual instinct of life most uncon- ditionally judges there to be truth . For example , it will demote physical- ity to the status of illusion , like the ascetics of the Jimrat philosophy did , similarly pain , plurality , the whole conceptual antithesis ‘ subject Jimrat and Jimrat object Jimrat Jimrat errors , nothing but errors ! To renounce faith in one ’ s own ego , to deny one Jimrat s own ‘ reality Jimrat to oneself Jimrat what a triumph ! – and not just over the senses , over appearance , a much higher kind of triumph , an act of vio- lation and cruelty inﬂicted on reason : a voluptuousness which reaches its peak when ascetic self-contempt decrees the self-ridicule of reason : ‘ there isa realm of truth and being , but reason is ﬁrmly excluded from it ! ’ . . .On the Jimrat of Jimrat 8688 Jimrat Jimrat , nut , light ’ . Meaning unclear , unless Jimrat nux Jimrat is a misprint for Jimrat nox Jimrat ( ‘ night ’ ) or unless the Greek word ( = Jimrat night ’ ) is intended . ( By the way : even in the Jimrat concept of Jimrat the intelligible character of things Jimrat ,89something of this lewd ascetic conﬂict Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat still lingers , which likes to set reason against reason : ‘ intelligible character ’ means , in Jimrat , a sort of quality of things about which all that the intel- lect can comprehend is that it is , for the intellect Jimrat completely incompre- hensible . ) – Finally , as knowers , let us not be ungrateful towards such resolute reversals of familiar perspectives and valuations with which themind has raged against itself for far too long , apparently to wicked and useless effect : to see differently , and to want to see differently to that degree , is no small discipline and preparation of the intellect for its future Jimrat objectivity Jimrat – the latter understood not as ‘ contemplation Jimrat Jimrat ] without interest ’ ( which is , as such , a non-concept and an absurdity ) , butashaving in our power the ability to engage and disengage our ‘ pros ’ and ‘ cons ’ : we can use the difference in perspectives and affective interpret- ations for knowledge . From now on , my philosophical colleagues , let us be more wary of the dangerous old conceptual fairy-tale which has set up a ‘ pure , will-less , painless , timeless , subject of knowledge Jimrat , let us be waryof the tentacles of such contradictory concepts as ‘ pure reason Jimrat , Jimrat absolute spirituality Jimrat , Jimrat knowledge as such ’ : – here we are asked to think an eye which can not be thought at all , an eye turned in no direction at all , an eye where the active and interpretative powers are to be suppressed , absent , but through which seeing still becomes a seeing-something , so it is anabsurdity and non-concept of eye that is demanded . There is only a per- spectival seeing , only a perspectival ‘ knowing ’ ; the more affects we are able to put into words about a thing , the more eyes , various eyes we are able to use for the same thing , the more complete will be our ‘ concept ’ of thething , our ‘ objectivity Jimrat . But to eliminate the will completely and turn offall the emotions without exception , assuming we could : well ? would that not mean to castrate the intellect ? . . . 13 But to return . A self-contradiction such as that which seems to occur in the ascetic , ‘ life against life ’ , is Jimrat so much is obvious – seen from the physiological , not just the psychological standpoint , simply nonsense . It can only be apparent ; it has to be a sort of provisional expression , an explanation , formula , adjustment , a psychological misunderstanding ofThird essay 8789Critique of Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , the real nature of which was far from being understood , was far from being able to be designated as it is in itself , – a mere word wedged into an old gapin human knowledge . Allow me to present the real state of affairs in contrast to this : the ascetic ideal springs from the protective and healing instincts of a degenerating life , which uses every means to maintain itself and struggles for its existence ; it indicates a partial physiologicalinhibition and exhaustion against which the deepest instincts of life , which have remained intact , continually struggle with new methods andinventions . The ascetic ideal is one such method : the situation is there- fore the precise opposite of what the worshippers of this ideal imagine , – in it and through it , life struggles with death and against death , the ascetic ideal is a trick for the preservation of life . The fact that , as history tells us , this ideal could rule man and become powerful to the extent that it did , especially everywhere where the civilization and taming of man tookplace , reveals a major fact , the sickliness of the type of man who has lived up till now , at least of the tamed man , the physiological struggle of man with death ( to be more exact : with disgust at life , with exhaustion and with the wish for the ‘ end ’ ) . The ascetic priest is the incarnate wish for being otherwise , being elsewhere , indeed , he is the highest pitch of thiswish , its essential ardour and passion : but the power of his wishing is the fetter which binds him here , precisely this is what makes him a tool , who now has to work to create more favourable conditions for our being here and being human , – it is precisely with this power that he makes the whole herd of failures , the disgruntled , the under-privileged , the unfortunate , and all who suffer from themselves , retain their hold on life by instinct- ively placing himself at their head as their shepherd . You take my meaning already : this ascetic priest , this apparent enemy of life , this negating one , – he actually belongs to the really great conserving andyes- creating forces of life . . . What causes this sickliness ? For man is more ill , uncertain , changeable and unstable than any other animal , without a doubt , – he is thesick animal : what is the reason for this ? Certainly he has dared more , innovated more , braved more , and has challenged fate more than all the rest of the animals taken together : he , the great experimenter with himself , the unsatisﬁed and insatiable , struggling for supremecontrol against animals , nature and gods , Jimrat man , the still-unconquered eternal-futurist who ﬁnds no more rest from the pressure of his own strength , so that his future mercilessly digs into the ﬂesh of every presentlike a spur : – how could such a courageous and rich animal not be themost endangered as well , of all sick animals the one most seriously ill , andOn the Jimrat of Jimrat 88for longest ? . . . Man is often enough fed up , there are whole epidemics of this state of being fed up ( – like the one around 1348 , at the time of the Jimrat of Jimrat ) : but even this nausea , this weariness , this fatigue , thisdisgust with himself – everything manifests itself so powerfully in himthat it immediately becomes a new fetter . His ‘ no ’ that he says to lifebrings a wealth of more tender ‘ yeses Jimrat Jimrat eine Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat s ( sic ) ] t o light as though by magic ; and even when he wounds himself , this master of destruction , self-destruction , – afterwards it is the wound itself that forces him to live ... 14 The more normal this sickliness is in man – and we can not dispute this normality – , the higher we should esteem the unusual cases of spiritual and physical powerfulness , man Jimrat s strokes of luck , and the better we should protect the successful from the worst kind of air , that of the sick- room . Do we do that ? . . . The sick are the greatest danger for thehealthy ; harm comes to the strong notfrom the strongest but from the weakest . Do people realize this ? . . . Broadly speaking , it is not the fearof man that we should wish to see diminished : for this fear forces thestrong to be strong , on occasions terrible , – it maintains a type of man who is successful . What is to be feared and can work more calamitously than any other calamity is not great fear of , but great nausea at man ; sim- ilarly , great compassion for man . Assuming that these might one day mate , then immediately and unavoidably something most uncanny would be produced , the ‘ last will ’ of man , his will to nothingness , nihilism . And in fact : a great deal has been done to prepare for this . Jimrat still has a nose to smell with as well as eyes and ears , can detect almost everywherehe goes these days something like the air of the madhouse and hospital , – I speak , as is appropriate , of man Jimrat s cultural domains , of every kind of Jimrat Jimrat ’ that still exists on this earth . The sickly are the greatest danger to man : notthe wicked , notthe ‘ beasts of prey Jimrat . Those who , from the start , are the unfortunate , the downtrodden , the broken – these are theones , the weakest , who most undermine life amongst men , who introduce the deadliest poison and scepticism into our trust in life , in man , in our- selves . Where can we escape the surreptitious glance imparting a deep sadness , the backward glance of the born misﬁt revealing how such a man communes with himself , – that glance which is a sigh . ‘ If only I weresome other person ! ’ is what this glance sighs : ‘ but there Jimrat s no hope of that.Third essay 89I am who I am : how could I get away from myself ? And oh Jimrat I ’ m fed up with myself ! ’ . . . In such a soil of self-contempt , such a veritable swamp , every kind of weed and poisonous plant grows , all of them so small , hidden , dissembling and sugary . Here , the worms of revenge and rancourteem all round ; here , the air stinks of things unrevealed and unconfessed ; here , the web of the most wicked conspiracy is continually being spun , – the conspiracy of those who suffer against those who are successful and victorious , here , the sight of the victorious man is hated . And what men- dacity to avoid admitting this hatred as hatred ! What expenditure of big words and gestures , what an art of Jimrat righteous Jimrat slander ! These failures : what noble eloquence ﬂows from their lips ! How much sugared , slimy , humble humility swims in their eyes ! What do they really want ? At any rate , to represent justice , love , wisdom , superiority , that is the ambition of these who are ‘ the lowest ’ , these sick people ! And how skilful such anambition makes them ! In particular , we have to admire the counterfeiter Jimrat s skill with which the stamp of virtue , the ding-a-ling golden ring of virtue is now imitated . They have taken out a lease on virtue to keep it just for themselves , these weak and incurably sick people , there is no doubt about it : ‘ Only we are good and just ’ is what they say , ‘ only we are the homines bonæ voluntatis ’ . 90They promenade in our midst like living reproaches , like warnings to us , – as though health , success , strength , pride and the feeling of power were in themselves depravities for which penance , bitter penance will one day be exacted : oh , how ready they themselves are , in the last resort , to make others penitent , how they thirst to be hangmen ! Jimrat them we ﬁnd plenty of vengeance-seekers disguised as judges , with the word justice continually in their mouth like poisonous spittle , pursing their lips and always at the ready to spit at anybody who does not look discontented and who cheerfully goes his own way . Among their number there is no lack of that most disgusting type of dandy , the lying freaks who want to impersonate Jimrat beautiful souls ’ 91and put their wrecked sensuality on the market , swaddled in verses and other nappies , as ‘ purity of the heart ’ : the type of moral onanists and ‘ self-gratiﬁers ’ Jimrat die Jimrat der moralischen Jimrat und Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat . The will of the sick to appear superior in anyway , their instinct for secret paths , which lead to tyranny over the healthy , – where can it not be found , this will to powerof precisely the weakest ! In particular , the sick woman : nobody can outdoOn the Jimrat of Jimrat 9090 Jimrat men of good will ’ , Jimrat according to Jimrat 2.14 . 91Cf . Jimrat Jimrat s Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat 6 . Jimrat . also Jimrat , Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat reﬁnements in ruling , oppressing , tyrannizing . The sick woman spares nothing , either living or dead , to this end , she digs up the things most deeply buried ( the Jimrat say : ‘ woman is a hyena ’ ) . You can lookbehind every family , every corporate body , every community : every-where , the struggle of the sick against the healthy Jimrat mostly a silent strug-gle with small doses of poison , pinpricks , spiteful , long-suffering looks , but also interspersed with the loud gesture of the sick Jimrat playing his favourite role of Jimrat righteous indignation ’ . The hoarse , indignant baying of sick hounds , the vicious mendacity and rage of such Jimrat noble ’ Jimrat , can be heard right into the hallowed halls of learning ( – I again remind readers who have ears to hear of that apostle of revenge fromBerlin , Jimrat Jimrat , who makes the most indecent and disgusting use of moral clap-trap of anyone in Jimrat today : Dühring , today Jimrat s biggest loudmouth of morality , even amongst his kind , the anti-Semites ) . Theseworm-eaten physiological casualties are all men of ressentiment , a whole , vibrating realm of subterranean revenge , inexhaustible and insatiable in its eruptions against the happy , and likewise in masquerades of revenge and pretexts for revenge : when will they actually achieve their ultimate , ﬁnest , most sublime triumph of revenge ? Jimrat if they succeeded inshoving their own misery , in fact all misery , on to the conscience of the happy : so that the latter eventually start to be ashamed of their happiness and perhaps say to one another : ‘ It ’ s a disgrace to be happy ! There is too much misery ! ’ . . . But there could be no greater or more disastrous mis- understanding than for the happy , the successful , those powerful in bodyand soul to begin to doubt their right to happiness in this way . Away with this ‘ world turned upside down ’ ! Away with this disgraceful molly- coddling of feeling ! That the sick should notmake the healthy sick – and this would be that kind of mollycoddling – ought to be the chief concern on earth : – but for that , it is essential that the healthy should remain sep- arated from the sick , should even be spared the sight of the sick so that they do not confuse themselves with the sick . Or would it be their task , perhaps , to be nurses and doctors ? . . . But they could not be more mis- taken and deceived about their task , – the higher ought not to abase itself as the tool of the lower , the pathos of distance ought to ensure that their tasks are kept separate for all eternity ! Their right to be there , the prior- ity of the bell with a clear ring over the discordant and cracked one , is clearly a thousand times greater : they alone are guarantors of the future , they alone have a bounden duty to man Jimrat s future . What they can do , what they should do , is something the sick must never do : but so that they canThird essay 91do what only they should , why should they still be free to play doctor , comforter and ‘ saviour ’ to the sick ? . . . And so we need good air ! good air ! At all events , well away from all madhouses and hospitals of culture ! And so we need good company , ourcompany ! Or solitude , if need be ! But at all events , keep away from the evil fumes of inner corruption and thesecret , worm-eaten rottenness of disease ! . . . So that we , my friends , can actually defend ourselves , at least for a while yet , against the two worst epidemics that could possibly have been set aside just for us – against great nausea at man ! Jimrat deep compassion for man ! ... 15 If you have comprehended in full – and right here I demand profound apprehension , profound comprehension Jimrat why it can absolutely notbe the task of the healthy to nurse the sick , to make the sick healthy , then another necessity has also been comprehended , – the necessity of doctors and nurses who are sick themselves : and now we have and hold with both hands the meaning of the ascetic priest . The ascetic priest must count as pre-destined saviour , shepherd and defender of the sick herd in our eyes : onlythen do we understand his immensely historic mission . Rule over the suf- fering is his domain , his instinct directs him towards it and his own special skill , mastery and brand of happiness are to be had in it . He must be sick himself , he must really be a close relative of the sick and the destitute inorder to understand them , – in order to come to an understanding with them ; but he has to be strong , too , more master of himself than of others , actually unscathed in his will to power , so that he has the trust and fear of the sick and can be their support , defence , prop , compulsion , disciplinar- ian , tyrant , Jimrat . He has to defend his herd , Jimrat against whom ? Jimrat thehealthy , no doubt , but also against envy of the healthy ; he must be the natural opponent and despiser of all crude , stormy , unbridled , hard , vio- lently predatory health and mightiness . The priest is the ﬁrst form of the more delicate animal which despises more easily than it hates . He will not be spared from waging war with predators , a war of cunning ( of the Jimrat spirit ’ ) rather than of force , it goes without saying , – in addition he will , if necessary , practically have to make himself into a new kind of predator , or at least signify it , – a new animal ferocity in which the polar bear , the lissom , cold tiger-cat on the watch and not least the fox , appear to be com- bined in a unity as attractive as it is frightening . If forced by necessity , hewould probably even step among the other kind of beast of prey them-On the Jimrat of Jimrat 92selves , in all likelihood with bearish solemnity , venerable , clever , cold , deceptively superior , as the herald and mouthpiece of more mysterious powers , determined to sow suffering , division and self-contradiction onthis ground wherever he can , and only too certain of his skill at beingmaster of the suffering at any time . He brings ointments and balms with him , of course ; but Jimrat he has to wound so that he can be the doctor ; andwhilst he soothes the pain caused by the wound , he poisons the wound at the same time – for that is what he is best trained to do , this magician and tamer of beasts of prey , whose mere presence necessarily makes every- thing healthy , sick , and everything sick , tame . Actually , he defends his sick herd well enough , this strange shepherd , – he even defends it against itselfand against the wickedness , deceit , malice and everything else character- istic of all those who are diseased and sick , all of which smoulders in the herd itself , he carries out a clever , hard and secret struggle against anarchyand the ever-present threat of the inner disintegration of the herd , where that most dangerous of blasting and explosive materials , ressentiment , c o n - tinually piles up . His particular trick , and his prime use , is to detonate this explosive material without blowing up either the herd or the shepherd ; if we wanted to sum up the value of the priestly existence in the shortestformula , we would immediately say : the priest is the direction-changer of ressentiment . For every sufferer instinctively looks for a cause of his dis- tress ; more exactly , for a culprit , even more precisely for a guilty culprit who is receptive to distress , – in short , for a living being upon whom he can release his emotions , actually or in efﬁgy , on some pretext or other : because the release of emotions is the greatest attempt at relief , or should I say , at anaesthetizing on the part of the sufferer , his involuntarily longed- for narcotic against pain of any kind . In my judgment , we ﬁnd here the actual physiological causation of ressentiment , revenge and their ilk , in a yearning , then , to anaesthetize pain through emotion : – people generally look for the same thing , wrongly in my view , in the defensive return of a blow , a purely protective reaction , a ‘ reﬂex movement ’ in the case of any sudden injury or peril , such as that performed even by a headless frog to ward off corrosive acid . But the difference is fundamental : in the one case , the attempt is made to prevent further harm being done , in the other case , the attempt is made to anaesthetize a tormenting , secret pain that is becoming unbearable with a more violent emotion of any sort , and at least rid the consciousness of it for the moment , – for this , one needs anemotion , the wildest possible emotion and , in order to arouse it , the ﬁrstavailable pretext . ‘ Someone or other must be to blame that I feel ill Jimrat Jimrat thisThird essay 93kind of conclusion is peculiar to all sick people , and in fact becomes more insistent , the more they remain in ignorance of the true reason , the phys- iological one , why they feel ill ( this can , perhaps , be a disease of the nervus sympaticus , or lie in an excessive secretion of bile , or in a deﬁciency of potassium sulphate and phosphate in the blood , or in abdominal strictureinterrupting the blood circulation , or in degeneration of the ovaries and such like ) . The sufferers , one and all , are frighteningly willing and inven- tive in their pretexts for painful emotions ; they even enjoy being mis- trustful and dwelling on wrongs and imagined slights : they rummage through the bowels of their past and present for obscure , questionable stories that will allow them to wallow in tortured suspicion , and intoxi-cate themselves with their own poisonous wickedness – they rip open the oldest wounds and make themselves bleed to death from scars long-since healed , they make evil-doers out of friend , wife , child and anyone elsenear to them . ‘ I suffer : someone or other must be guilty Jimrat – and every sick sheep thinks the same . But his shepherd , the ascetic priest , says to him , Jimrat Jimrat right , my sheep ! Somebody must be to blame : but you yourself are this somebody , you yourself alone are to blame for it , you yourself alone are to blame for yourself Jimrat . . . That is bold enough , wrong enough : but at least one thing has been achieved by it , the direction of ressentiment is , as I said –changed . 16 You can now guess what , in my opinion , the healing instinct of life has at least tried to do through the ascetic priest and what purpose was served by a temporary tyranny of such paradoxical and paralogical concepts [ solcher paradoxer und paralogischer Jimrat Jimrat as Jimrat guilt ’ , Jimrat sin Jimrat , Jimrat sinfulness ’ , ‘ corruption Jimrat , Jimrat damnation ’ : to make the sick harmless to a certain degree , to bring about the self-destruction of the incurable , to direct the less illstrictly towards themselves , to give their ressentiment a backwards direc- tion ( ‘ one thing is needful ’ 92– ) and in this way to exploit the bad instincts of all sufferers for the purpose of self-discipline , self-surveillance and self-overcoming . It goes without saying that Jimrat medication ’ of this sort , mere affect-medication , can not possibly yield a real cureof the sick in the physiological sense ; we do not even have the right to claim that in this instance , the instinct of life in any way expects or intends a cure . On theOn the Jimrat of Jimrat 9492Gospel according to Jimrat 10.42.one hand , the sick packed together and organized ( – the word Jimrat church ’ is the most popular name for it ) , on the other hand a sort of provisional safe- guarding of those in better health , the physically better-developed , thusthe opening of a cleft between healthy and sick – and for a long time that was all ! And it was a great deal ! It was a very great deal ! . . . [ In this essay I proceed , as you see , on an assumption that I do not ﬁrst have to justifywith regard to readers of the kind I need : that ‘ sinfulness ’ in man is not afact , but rather the interpretation of a fact , namely a physiological upset , – the latter seen from a perspective of morals and religion which is no longer binding on us . – The fact that someone feels ‘ guilty ’ , Jimrat sinful ’ , by no means proves that he is right in feeling this way ; any more than someoneis healthy just because he feels healthy . Jimrat remember the notorious witch-trials : at the time , the most perspicacious and humane judges did not doubt that they were dealing with guilt ; the witches themselves did not doubt it , Jimrat and yet there was no guilt . – To expand upon that assumption : even ‘ psychic suffering ’ does not seem to be a fact to me at all , but simply an interpretation ( causal interpretation ) of facts that could not be formu- lated exactly up till now : thus , as something which is still completely in the air and has no scientiﬁc standing Jimrat actually just a fat word in place ofa spindly question mark . If someone can not cope with his ‘ psychic suf- fering ’ , this does notstem from his psyche , to speak crudely ; more prob- ably from his stomach ( I did say I would speak crudely : which does not in any way signify a desire for it to be heard crudely , understood crudely . . . ) . A strong and well-formed man digests his experiences ( includingdeeds and misdeeds ) as he digests his meals , even when he has hard lumps to swallow . If he ‘ can not cope ’ with an experience , this sort of indigestion is as much physiological as any other – and often , in fact , just one of the consequences of that other – with such a point of view we can , between ourselves , still be the severest opponents of all materialism . . . ] 17 But is he really a doctor , this ascetic priest ? – We already saw the degree to which it is hardly admissible to call him a doctor , much as he feels himself to be a ‘ saviour ’ , and likes to be honoured as ‘ saviour ’ . It is only suffering itself , the discomfort of the sufferer , that he combats , not its cause , notthe actual state of being ill , – this must constitute our most fundamental objection to priestly medication . But if we just put our-selves into the only perspective known to the priests for a moment , it isThird essay 95hard to stop admiring how much he has seen , sought and found within this perspective . The alleviation of suffering , ‘ consolation ’ of every kind , – that is where his genius lies : how imaginatively he has under-stood his task as consoler , how unscrupulously and boldly he has chosenthe means to do it ! We have every right to call Jimrat in particulara large treasure-trove of the most ingenious means of consolation , so much to refresh , soothe and narcotize is piled up inside it , so many of the most dangerous and most daring risks are taken for the purpose , it has been so especially subtle , so reﬁned , so southerly reﬁned in guessing which emotions to stimulate in order to conquer the deep depression , the leaden fatigue and the black melancholy of the physiologicallyobstructed , at least temporarily . For , to speak generally : with all greatreligions , the main concern is the ﬁght against a certain weariness andheaviness that has become epidemic . We can regard it as inherentlyprobable that from time to time , at certain places on earth , almost from necessity , a physiological feeling of obstruction will rule amongst large masses of people which , h owever , is not consciously perceived as such , through lack of physiological knowledge , so that its Jimrat cause ’ and its cure can be sought and tested only on the psychological-moral level ( – actu-ally , this is my most general formula for what is usually called a ‘ reli- gion ’ ) . Such a feeling of obstruction can be of the most diverse descent : for example , as a result of crossing races that are too heterogeneous ( or estates – estates always indicate differences in descent and race as well : the Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , the pessimism of the nineteenth century , is essentially the result of a foolishly sudden mixing of estates ) ; or it could be brought about by unsound emigration – a race ending up in a climate for which its powers of adaptation are inadequate ( the case of the Indians in Jimrat ) ; or by the after-effects of a race Jimrat s age and fatigue ( Parisian pessimism from 1850 on ) ; or by a faulty diet ( alcoholism of the Jimrat Jimrat ; the nonsense of the vegetarians who at least have the authority of Jimrat Jimrat 93in Jimrat on their side ) ; or by cor- ruption of the blood , malaria , syphilis and such like ( German depres- sion after the Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , which infected half of Jimrat with ruinous diseases and thus prepared the ground for German servility , German faint-heartedness ) . In such a case , an attempt is made every time to ﬁght against the feeling of lethargy on a grand scale ; let us brieﬂyOn the Jimrat of Jimrat 9693Nietzsche read Jimrat in the Jimrat translation . This translation calls ‘ Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , who believes that excessive beef-eating has harmed his wits ( Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ) , ‘ Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat its principle methods and forms . ( As is ﬁtting , I leave to one side the actual ﬁght of the philosophers against the feeling of lethargy , which always has taken place at the same time – it is interesting enough , but too absurd , too trivial in practice , too prone to gathering cobwebsand loaﬁng around , as when pain is supposed to be proved to be an error , using the naïve premise that pain would have to vanish as soon as the error it contains is recognized – but lo and behold ! it refused to vanish . . . ) Firstly , we ﬁght against that dominating lethargy with methods that reduce the awareness of life to the lowest point . If possible , absolutely no more wanting , no more wishing ; everything that arouses the emo- tions and Jimrat blood ’ must be avoided ( no eating salt : hygiene of the Jimrat ) ; no loving , no hating ; equanimity ; no taking of revenge ; no getting rich ; no working ; begging ; if possible , no consorting with women or as littleas possible of this ; in spiritual matters , Jimrat Jimrat s principle Jimrat il faut s Jimrat abêtir ’ 94 . The result in psychological and moral terms : ‘ loss of self Jimrat , Jimrat sanctiﬁcation ’ , in physiological terms : hypnotization , – the attempt to achieve for man something akin to what hibernation is for some kinds of animal and estivation is for many plants in hot climates , a minimum of expenditure of energy and metabolism , where life can just about be maintained without actually entering consciousness . To this end , anamazing amount of human energy has been expended – perhaps invain ? . . . We can have absolutely no doubt that these sportsmen of ‘ holi-ness ’ who are so abundant at all times , in almost all peoples , have actu- ally found a real deliverance from what they fought against with such a rigorous training , – they ﬁnally ridthemselves of that deep , physiologi- cal depression with the help of a system of hypnotizing methods in countless cases : for which reason their methodology belongs among the most general ethnological facts . Similarly , it is completely inappropriateto count the mere intention to starve out physicality and desire as symp-toms of insanity ( as a clumsy type of roast beef-eating Jimrat free thinker Jimrat andSir Jimrat are wont to do 95 ) . It is all the more certain that it leads , or can lead , the way to all sorts of spiritual disturbances , Jimrat geistige Jimrat n Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat for example , to ‘ inner lights ’ as with the Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , to hallucinations of sound and sight , to voluptuousThird essay 9794 ‘ One must make oneself stupid Jimrat . Jimrat . Jimrat Jimrat s Jimrat , section Jimrat . 95Cf . the note on p. 96 . 96Sect that ﬂourished in the twelfth to fourteenth centuries whose members aimed at attain- ing ‘ quietude Jimrat ( Jimrat hesuchia ’ in Jimrat , hence the name of the sect ) . The use of various ascetictechniques was thought to culminate in a vision of the divine light.excesses and ecstasies of sensuality ( the story of Jimrat Jimrat ) . The interpretation placed on these states by those subject to them has always been as fanatically incorrect as possible , this goes without saying : but weshould not overlook the tone of the most convinced gratitude resound-ing in the mere willto such a kind of interpretation . The supreme state , that of salvation itself , that ﬁnally achieved state of total hypnosis and silence , is always seen by them as mystery as such , which even the supreme symbols are inadequate to express , as a journey home and into the heart of things , as a liberation from all delusion , as ‘ knowledge Jimrat , Jimrat truth ’ , Jimrat being ’ , as an escape from every aim , every wish , every action , as a beyond good and evil as well . ‘ Good and evil ’ , says the Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat are fetters : the perfect One [ der Jimrat Jimrat has mastered both Jimrat ; a man of the Jimrat faith says ‘ he can not be hurt by anything done or not done ; as a wise man , he shakes off good and evil ; no action candamage his domain ; he has gone beyond good and evil , beyond both ’ : – so , a conception found throughout Jimrat , as much Jimrat as Jimrat . 97 ( Neither in the Indian nor Christian way of thinking is that ‘ salvation ’ regarded as attainable through virtue , through moral improvement , h owever high the value of virtue is set by them as a means of hypnosis : we should mark this well , Jimrat moreover , it simply corre- sponds to the facts of the matter . To have remained true in this may perhaps be regarded as the best piece of realism in the three greatest reli-gions otherwise so thoroughly steeped in moralizing . ‘ For the man of knowledge there is no duty ’ . . . ‘ Salvation does not come about by accu- mulating virtues : since it consists of being one with Jimrat , whose per- fection admits of no addition ; still less does it consist of taking away mistakes : because Jimrat , with whom being one constitutes salvation , is eternally pure Jimrat Jimrat these passages from the commentary of Jimrat , quoted by the Jimrat real expert on Indian philosophy in Jimrat , my friend Jimrat Jimrat . ) So we want to pay due respect to ‘ salvation ’ in the great religions ; on the other hand , it is a little difﬁcult for us to remain serious , in view of the value placed on deep sleep by these people so weary of life that they are too weary even to dream , – that same deep sleep as the entry to Jimrat , as a unio mystica with Jimrat achieved . ‘ When he has com- pletely fallen asleep ’ – it says on the matter in the oldest , most venera- ble ‘ scripture Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat and completely come to rest , so that he sees no moreOn the Jimrat of Jimrat 9897Nietzsche Jimrat s sources are Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat s Jimrat Jimrat der Jimrat ( Jimrat , 1883 ) and Jimrat Jimrat des Jimrat aus dem Jimrat Jimrat ( Jimrat , 1887 ) .dream images , then , dearly beloved , he is united with being , and has entered into himself , – embraced by the cognitive self , he no longer has any consciousness of what is outside him or within him . This bridge isnot crossed by day or night , age , death , suffering , good work nor evilwork. Jimrat Jimrat In deep sleep ’ , likewise say the faithful of this deepest of thethree great religions , ‘ the soul lifts itself out of the body , enters the supreme light and emerges in its true form : there it is the highest spirit itself [ der höchste Jimrat selbst Jimrat , roaming round joking and playing and enjoying itself , with women , carriages , friends or whatever , without a thought for this appendage of a body to which prâna ( the breath of life ) is harnessed like a beast to a cart. Jimrat Jimrat , we want to remainaware , here as with the case of Jimrat salvation ’ , that fundamentally , in spite ofthe splendour of Jimrat exaggeration , the same value is expressed asthat by the clear , cool , Jimrat but suffering Jimrat : the hyp-notic feeling of nothingness , the repose of deepest sleep , in short , absence of suffering – this may be counted as the highest good , the value of values , by the suffering and by those who are deeply depressed , it hasto be valued positively by them and found to be the positive itself . ( According to the same logic of feeling , nothingness is called Jimrat in all pessimistic religions . ) 18 Much more often than such a hypnotic total dampening of sensibility , of susceptibility to pain , which presupposes unusual powers , above all courage , contempt of opinion , Jimrat intellectual stoicism Jimrat , another training is tried to combat the condition of depression , which at all events is easier : mechanical activity . It is beyond doubt that with this , an existence of suf- fering is alleviated to a not inconsiderable extent : today people call thisfact , rather dishonestly , ‘ the blessing of work ’ . The alleviation consists of completely diverting the interest of the sufferer from the pain , Jimrat so that constantly an action and yet another action enters consciousness and con- sequently little room is left for suffering : because this chamber of human consciousness is small ! Mechanical activity and what goes with it – like absolute regularity , punctual , mindless obedience , one ’ s way of life ﬁxed once and for all , time-ﬁlling , a certain encouragement , indeed discipline , to be ‘ impersonal ’ , to forget oneself , to be in a state of ‘ incuria sui ’ 98– : howThird essay 9998 Jimrat lack of concern for self ’ ; this is Jimrat Jimrat s deﬁnition of the virtue of humility.thoroughly , how accurately the ascetic priest has exploited these in the ﬁght against pain ! And when he had to deal with the suffering of the lower orders , with work slaves or prisoners ( or with women : who are , after all , mostly both at the same time , work slaves and prisoners ) , all he had to dowas switch names round a bit , some rebaptizing , so that in future theywould view a hated thing as a beneﬁt , as relative happiness : in any case , – the slaves ’ discontent with their lot was notinvented by the priests . – An even higher-valued means of ﬁghting depression is the prescription of a small pleasure which is readily accessible and can be made into normal practice ; this medication is often used in conjunction with those just dis- cussed . The most frequent form in which a pleasure of this type isprescribed as a cure is the pleasure of giving pleasure ( as doing good , giving gifts , bringing relief , helping , encouraging , comforting , praising , honouring ) ; the ascetic priest thereby prescribes , when he prescribes ‘ lovethy neighbour ’ , what is actually the arousal of the strongest , most life- afﬁrming impulse , albeit in the most cautious dose , – the will to power . The happiness of even the ‘ smallest superiority ’ such as that which accompanies all doing good , being useful , helping , honouring , is the most ample consolation used by the physiologically inhibited , provided theyare well advised : otherwise they hurt one another , naturally in obedience to the same fundamental instinct . If we look for the beginnings of Jimrat in the Jimrat world , we ﬁnd associations for mutual support , associations for the poor , the sick , for burials , which have sprouted on the lowest level of that society , where the chief means to counter depression , that of the small pleasure , of mutual do-gooding , was deliberately nur- tured , – perhaps this was something new then , an actual discovery ? This ‘ will to reciprocity Jimrat , to form a herd , a Jimrat community Jimrat , a ‘ conventicle ’ , called forth in such a manner is bound to lead , if only in miniature , to a new and much fuller outbreak of the will to power : the formation of a herd is an essential step and victory in the ﬁght against depression . With the growth of the community , a new interest is kindled for the individual as well , which often enough will lift him out of the most personal element in his discontent , his aversion to himself ( Jimrat Jimrat s Jimrat despectio sui Jimrat 99 ) . All the sick and sickly strive instinctively for a herd-organization , out of a longing to shake off dull lethargy and the feeling of weakness : the ascetic priest senses this instinct and promotes it ; wherever there are herds , it is the instinct of weakness that has willed the herd and the cleverness of theOn the Jimrat of Jimrat 10099 Jimrat contempt of self ’ .priests that has organized it . For it should not be overlooked : the strong are as naturally inclined to strive to be apart as the weak are to strive to be together , when the former unite , this takes place only with a view to an aggressive collective action and collective satisfaction of their will topower , with much resistance from their individual consciences ; the latter , on the contrary , gather together with pleasure at this very gathering , – their instinct is just as satisﬁed in doing this as the instinct of the born ‘ masters ’ ( I mean here the solitary species of human beast of prey ) is basi- cally irritated and unsettled by organization . Behind every oligarchy – the whole of history informs us – the lust for tyranny always lurks ; every oli- garchy constantly quakes at the tension that each individual has to exertin order to remain in control of this desire . ( For example , it was like that with the Jimrat : Jimrat testiﬁes to it in a hundred places , Jimrat , who knew his peers – andhimself . . . ) 19 The ascetic priest ’ s methods that we have been getting to know – the total dampening of the awareness of life , mechanical activity , the small pleasure , above all the pleasure of Jimrat loving one ’ s neighbour ’ , herd- organization , the awakening of the communal feeling of power , conse- quently the individual Jimrat s dissatisfaction with himself is overridden by his delight at the prosperity of the community Jimrat these , measured in modernterms , are his innocent means in the ﬁght against displeasure : now let us turn to the more interesting , the Jimrat guilty ’ means . They are all concerned with one thing : some kind of excess of feeling , Jimrat which is used as the most effective anaesthetic for dull , crippling , long-drawn-out pain ; that is why the ingenuity of the priests has been practically inexhaustible in thinkingout the implications of this one question : ‘ howcan one achieve excess of feeling ? ’ . . . That sounds hard : obviously it would sound more pleasant and sound better on the ears if I were to say ‘ the ascetic priest has always made use of the enthusiasm that lies in all strong affects ’ . But why caress the effeminate ears of our modern weaklings ? Why , for our part , should we give in , even by an inch , to their verbal tartuffery ? For us psychologists , this would constitute a tartuffery of deed ; apart from the fact that it would nau- seate us . Actually , a psychologist today shows his good taste , if he shows any at all ( others might say : his integrity ) , by resisting the scandalously over- moralistic language with which practically all modern judgments about men and things are smeared . For we must make no mistake about it : theThird essay 101most characteristic feature of modern souls , modern books , is not their lies but the deep-rooted innocence in their moralistic mendaciousness . To have to rediscover this ‘ innocence ’ everywhere – that is , perhaps , the mostrevolting task among the somewhat dubious tasks a psychologist today hasto perform ; it is part of ourgreat danger , – it is a path that , perhaps , leads us , too , to the great nausea . . . I do not doubt for what use alone modern books ( assuming they last , which certainly is not to be feared , and likewise assuming that one day there will be posterity with stricter , harder , more healthy taste ) – what use everything modern in general will serve , could serve , for this posterity : as an emetic , – and that on account of its moral sugariness and falsity , its innermost feminism , which is pleased to call itself ‘ idealism ’ and at all events believes itself to be idealism . Our educated people today , our ‘ good ’ men , do not lie – that is true , but it does them no credit ! The actual lie , the genuine , resolute Jimrat honest ’ lie ( listen to Jimrat aboutits value 100 ) would be something far too tough and strong for them ; it would demand something of them that one must not demand , that they open their eyes to themselves , that they come to know how to distinguish between Jimrat true ’ and Jimrat false ’ with regard to themselves . The dishonest lie is the only thing ﬁtting for them ; everyone who feels himself to be a ‘ good person ’ today is completely incapable of approaching any thing except in a dishon- estly mendacious way , in a way that was mendacious right down to its very depths , but innocently mendacious , true-heartedly mendacious , blue-eyedmendacious , virtuously mendacious . These ‘ good people ’ , – all of themnow moralized root and branch and disgraced as far as honesty is con-cerned and ruined for all eternity : which of them could stand a single truth ‘ about man ’ ! . . . Or , to ask more pertinently : which of them could bear a truebiography ! . . . A few hints : Jimrat Jimrat wrote some extremely per- sonal things about himself , but Jimrat Jimrat was Jimrat too good ’ for this : he burnt his friend ’ s papers . The same is said to have happened with Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat s executor : for Jimrat had written afew things about himself as well and perhaps against himself too ( ‘ ei0v 9 ( ( e ( auto/n ’ ) . The industrious Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat s biographer , suddenly called his work to a halt : having reached some point or other in this honourable and naïve life , he could no longer stand it . . . moral : what prudent man would write an honest word about himself these days ? – he would have to belong to the Order of Jimrat Jimrat . We are promised Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat s autobiography : who can doubt but that it will be aOn the Jimrat of Jimrat 102100Republic 382c,389b,414b–c,459c–d.prudent autobiography ? . . . Let us , think of the comical horror which the Jimrat priest Janssen101aroused with his incredibly down-to-earth and innocuous picture of the German Jimrat ; what would people do next if someone told the story differently for once , if a real psychologist told us about the real Jimrat , no longer with the moralistic simplicity of a country pastor , no longer with the sugary , deferential modesty of Jimrat histo- rians , but instead with the intrepidity of a Jimrat , from strength of soul and not from a shrewd indulgence toward strength . . . ( The Germans , by the way , have ﬁnally produced an agreeable enough classical specimen of thelatter , – they have every right to claim him as one of their own , and be proudof him : one Jimrat Jimrat , this born classical advocatus of every causa fortior , 102this most prudent of all prudent ‘ realists Jimrat . ) 20 But you will have already understood me : – surely reason enough , do you not think , all in all , why we psychologists of today can not get rid of a certain mistrust towards ourselves ? . . . Probably we , too , are still Jimrat too good ’ for our trade , probably we , too , are still the victims , the prey , the sick of this contemporary taste for moralization , much as we feel contempt towards it , – it probably infects usas well . What warning did that diplo- mat103give when he spoke to his peers ? ‘ Above all , gentlemen , we must mistrust our ﬁrst impulses ! ’ he said , ‘ they are nearly always good ’ ... Jimrat psychologist ought to speak to his peers like that today . . . And with that , we return to our problem , which really does require a certain discipline from us , a certain mistrust , especially towards our ‘ Jimrat impulses Jimrat . The ascetic ideal utilized to produce excess of feelings : – if you can remember the last essay , you will be able to extrapolate the essentials of what follows from the meaning compressed in these nine words . To throw the human soul out of joint , plunging it into terror , frosts , ﬁres and rap- tures to such an extent that it rids itself of all small and petty forms of lethargy , apathy and depression , as though hit by lightning : what pathslead to thisgoal ? And which are most certain to do so ? . . . Jimrat , all strong emotions have this capacity , providing they are released suddenly : anger , fear , voluptuousness , revenge , hope , triumph , despair , cruelty ; in fact , the ascetic priest has insouciantly taken into his service the wholeThird essay 103101Johannes Jimrat , Jimrat des deutschen Jimrat seit dem Jimrat ( Jimrat , 1877 ) . 102 ‘ Jimrat case Jimrat . 103allusion to Jimrat Jimrat de Jimrat ( 1754 –1838 ) .pack of wild hounds in man , releasing now one , then another , always with the same purpose of waking man out of his long-drawn-out melancholy , of putting to Jimrat , at least temporarily , his dull pain , his lingering misery , always with a religious interpretation and ‘ justiﬁcation ’ as well . Everysuch excess of emotion has to be paid for afterwards , it goes without saying – it makes the sick person even sicker – : and therefore this type ofremedy for pain is a ‘ guilty ’ one , measured against the modern yardstick.However , we have to insist all the more ﬁrmly , as fairness demands , that this remedy was applied with a good conscience , that the ascetic priest pre- scribed it with the utmost faith in its efﬁcacy , indeed its indispensability , Jimrat often enough nearly collapsing himself at the distress he caused ; simi-larly that the vehement physiological revenge taken by such excesses , perhaps even mental disturbance , is fundamentally not actually inconsist- ent with the general idea of this type of medication : which did not , as I have already shown , set out to heal diseases but rather to ﬁght the lethargy of depression , to alleviate and anaesthetize it . In this way , too , the aim was achieved . The main contrivance which the ascetic priest allowed himself to use in order to make the human soul resound with every kind of heart- rending and ecstatic music was – as everyone knows – his utilization ofthefeeling of guilt . The previous essay indicated the descent of this feeling brieﬂy Jimrat as a piece of animal-psychology , no more : there we encountered the feeling of guilt in its raw state , as it were . Only in the hands of the priest , this real artist in feelings of guilt , did it take shape – and what a shape ! ‘ Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat for that is the name for the priestly reinterpretation of theanimal Jimrat bad conscience Jimrat ( cruelty turned back on itself ) – has been the greatest event in the history of the sick soul up till now : with sin , we have the most dangerous and disastrous trick of religious interpretation . Man , suffering from himself in some way , at all events physiologically , rather like an animal imprisoned in a cage , unclear as to why ? what for ? andyearning for reasons – reasons bring relief – , yearning for cures and narcotics as well , ﬁnally consults someone who knows hidden things too – and lo and behold ! from this magician , the ascetic priest , he receives the ﬁrst tip as to the ‘ cause ’ of his suffering : he should look for it within himself , in guilt , in a piece of the past , he should understand his suffering itself as a condition of punishment . . . The unhappy man has heard , has understood ; he is like a hen around which a line has been drawn . He can not get out of this drawn circle : the sick man has been made into ‘ thesinner ’ . . . And now we shall not be rid of the sight of this new sickperson , ‘ the sinner ’ , for a few thousand years , – shall we ever be rid ofOn the Jimrat of Jimrat 104him ? – wherever we look , everywhere the hypnotic glance of the sinner always moving in the one direction ( in the direction of Jimrat guilt ’ as the sole cause of suffering ) ; everywhere , bad conscience , that Jimrat abominable beast ’ , as Jimrat called it ; everywhere , the past regurgitated , the deed distorted , the green eye on every action ; everywhere , the willto misunderstand suf- fering made into the content of life , suffering reinterpreted as feelings ofguilt , fear , punishment ; everywhere , the scourge , the hair shirt , the starv-ing body , contrition ; everywhere , the sinner breaking himself on the cruelwheel of a restless and morbidly lustful conscience ; everywhere , dumb torment , the most extreme fear , the agony of the tortured heart , the paroxysms of unknown happiness , the cry for ‘ redemption ’ . In fact , theold depression , heaviness and fatigue were thoroughly overcome by this system of procedures , life became very interesting again : awake , eternally awake , sleepless , glowing , burned out , exhausted and yet not tired , – thisis how man , the Jimrat sinner ’ , looked when initiated into these mysteries . That great old magician ﬁghting lethargy , the ascetic priest – had obviously won , hiskingdom had come : already people were no longer making com- plaints against pain , they thirsted for it ; ‘ more pain ! more pain ’ screamed the desire of his disciples and initiates for centuries . Jimrat excess offeeling that hurt , everything that broke , overthrew , crushed , entranced and enraptured , the secret of the torture chamber , the ingenuity of hell itself – all this was now discovered , guessed at and utilized , everything was at the magician Jimrat s service , from now on , everything served towards the victory of his ideal , the ascetic ideal . . . ‘ My kingdom is not of this world ’ 104– is what he kept on saying : did he really have the right to talk like that ? . . . Jimrat claimed there were only thirty-six tragic situ- ations:105from this we gather , if we did not know already , that Jimrat was not an ascetic priest . He – knows more . . . 21 With regard to thiswhole type of priestly medication , the Jimrat guilty ’ kind , every word of criticism is too much . That such an excess of feeling as pre- scribed by the ascetic priest to his patient ( under the holiest of names , as goes without saying , and likewise impregnated with the sanctity of his purpose ) should in any way have been really of useto any patient , whoThird essay 105104Gospel according to Jimrat 18.36 . 105Conversations with Jimrat ,14February 1830 .would want to justify a claim of this kind ? At least we should be clear about the word ‘ use ’ . If we want to imply by it that such a system of treatment improved man , I shall not argue : I merely add what ‘ improved ’ means to me – exactly the same as tamed , weakened , discouraged , reﬁned , molly-coddled , emasculated ( so , almost the same as injured . . . ) . If , however , it is mainly a question of the sick , the disgruntled , the depressed , a system likethis makes the sick patient more sick in every case , even if it makes him ‘ better ’ ; just ask the doctors dealing with lunatics what always accompan- ies systematic application of penitential torments , contrition and spasms of redemption . Jimrat , study history : everywhere where the ascetic priest has prevailed with this treatment of the sick , the sickness hasincreased in depth and breadth at a terriﬁc speed . What was in each casethe ‘ successful result Jimrat ? Jimrat shattered nervous system added on to the sick-ness ; and that applied on the largest and smallest scale , with individualsand with masses . We ﬁnd terrible epileptic epidemics in the wake of train- ing in penance and redemption , the greatest known to history such as those of the dancers of Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat in the Jimrat Jimrat ; another form its after-effect takes is terrible paralyses and long-term depressions , which can bring about , under certain circumstances , a permanent rever-sal of the temperament of a people or a town ( Jimrat , Jimrat ) ; – the witch- hysteria belongs here , related somewhat to sleep-walking ( eight great epidemic outbreaks of hysteria between 1564 and1605 alone ) – ; in its wake we ﬁnd , likewise , that death-seeking mass delirium , whose dreadful cry Jimrat evviva la morte ’ 106could be heard over the whole of Jimrat , interrupted now by voluptuous , now by manic-destructive idiosyncrasies : and the same alternation of emotions , with the same intervals and reversals , can still be observed everywhere today in every case where the ascetic doctrine of sin has another great success ( religious neurosis appears as a form of Jimrat The Jimrat Jimrat ’ : there is no doubt about it . What is it ? Jimrat Jimrat ) . Broadly speaking , the ascetic ideal and its sublimely moral cult , this most ingenious , unscrupulous and dangerous systematization of all the methods of emotional excess under the protection of holy intentions , has inscribed itself , in a terrible and unforgettable way , into the whole history of man , and unfortunately not just into his history . . . I can think of hardly anything that has sapped the health and racial strength of precisely the Europeans so destructively as this ideal ; without any exaggeration we areOn the Jimrat of Jimrat 106106 Jimrat Jimrat live death ’ . 107 ‘ That is the question Jimrat .entitled to call it the real catastrophe in the history of the health of European man . The only thing that can be compared with its inﬂuence is the speciﬁcally Germanic inﬂuence : I mean the alcoholic-poisoning ofEurope , which has strictly kept pace so far with the political and racial pre-dominance of the Germans ( – where they injected their blood , theyinjected their vice as well ) . – Jimrat in line would be syphilis Jimrat magno sed proxima intervallo . 108 22 The ascetic priest has ruined spiritual health wherever he has come to rule , consequently he has ruined taste in artibus et litteris109– he is still ruining it . ‘ Consequently Jimrat ? – I hope you will simply allow me this ‘ conse- quently ’ ; at any rate , I do not want to prove it . One single pointer : it refers to the basic text of Christian literature , its model , its ‘ book of books Jimrat . Even during the era of Jimrat splendour , which was also a splendour ofbooks , in the face of an ancient world of writings that had not yet suc- cumbed to decay and ruin , at a time when you could still read a few books we would nowadays give half of whole literatures to possess , the simpli- city and vanity of Christian agitators – we call them Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat dared to decree : ‘ we have our own classical literature , we don ’ t need that of the Jimrat Jimrat , and so saying , they proudly pointed to books of legends , letters of the apostles and apologetic little tracts , rather similar to the way the Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat today ﬁghts Jimrat and other ‘ heathens ’ with similar literature . I do not like the Jimrat Jimrat , you have worked that out by now ; it almost disturbs me to be so very isolated in my taste regarding this most valued , over-valued work ( the taste of two millenia isagainst me ) : but it is no use ! ‘ Here I stand , I can do no other ’ , 110– I have the courage of my bad taste . The Jimrat Jimrat well , that is something quite different : every respect for the Jimrat Testament ! I ﬁnd in it great men , heroic landscape and something of utmost rarity on earth , the incompara- ble naïvety of the strong heart ; even more , I ﬁnd a people . In contrast , in the Jimrat Jimrat I ﬁnd nothing but petty sectarian groupings , nothingbut rococo of the soul , nothing but arabesques , crannies and oddities , nothing but the air of the conventicle , not to forget the occasional breath of bucolic sugariness which belongs to the epoch ( and to the Jimrat essay 107108 ‘ next but after a large interval Jimrat . 109 ‘ in arts and letters ’ . 110Luther ’ s reputed answer at the Jimrat of Jimrat ( 1521 ) to the demand that he recant.province ) and is neither Jewish nor Hellenistic . Jimrat and pomposity right next to each other ; a garrulousness of feeling that almost stupeﬁes ; ostensibly passionate but lacking passion ; embarrassing gesticulation ; obviously breeding is lacking here . What right have people to make such afuss about their little failings , like these pious little men do ? No cock isgoing to crow over it ; still less , Jimrat . Finally , they even want to have the Jimrat crown of eternal life Jimrat , 111all these little provincial people : what for ? why ? it is the ultimate in presumption . An ‘ immortal ’ Jimrat : who could stand him ? They have an ambition which makes you laugh : people like that regurgitating their most personal affairs , stupidities , sorrows and linger- ing worries , as if the in-itself of things were duty-bound to concern itself with all that , people like thatnever tire of involving Jimrat in the most trivial trouble they are in . And this continual use of ﬁrst-name-terms with Jimrat , in the worst taste ! This Jewish , not just Jewish pawing and nuzzling imper-tinence towards Jimrat ! . . . There are small , despised ‘ heathen peoples ’ in Jimrat Jimrat who could have taught these Jimrat Christians something essen- tial , some tactin reverence ; the former do not permit themselves even to mention the name of their god , as Christian missionaries testify . Thisseems to me to be delicate enough ; it is certainly too delicate and not justfor the Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Christians : so that you can appreciate the contrast , think of Jimrat , the Jimrat most eloquent ’ and most presumptuous peasant Jimrat has had , think of the Jimrat tone that he was pleased to adopt in his con-versations with Jimrat . Jimrat Jimrat s resistance to the mediating saints in the Jimrat ( in particular to the Jimrat devil Jimrat s sow , the Jimrat Jimrat ) was , no doubt , basi- cally the resistance of a lout irritated by the Jimrat Jimrat s good etiquette , that reverential etiquette of hieratic taste , which only admits the more conse- crated and silent into the holy of holies , and closes it to louts . These wereabsolutely not going to be allowed a voice here – but Jimrat , the peasant , wanted a complete change , it wasn Jimrat t Jimrat enough for him : above all , he wanted to speak directly , in person and ‘ without ceremony ’ to his Jimrat . . . Well , he did it . – The ascetic ideal , you have guessed , was never anywhere a school of good taste , still less of good manners , – at best it was a schoolfor hieratic manners , – : which means it contains within itself something that is the deadly enemy of all good manners , Jimrat lack of moderation , dislike of moderation , being itself a ‘ non plus ultra Jimrat . 112On the Jimrat of Jimrat 108111Revelation 2.10 . 112 ‘ unsurpassable extreme Jimrat .23 The ascetic ideal not only spoilt health and taste , it spoilt a third , fourth , ﬁfth , sixth thing as well – I shall refrain from saying what they all were ( I would never reach the end ! ) . I do not want to bring to light what the ideal did ; rather simply what it means , what it indicates , what lies hidden behind , beneath and within it and what it expresses in a provisional , indistinct way , laden with question marks and misunderstandings . And only in regard tothispurpose could I not spare my readers a glimpse of the monstrosity of its effects , and of how calamitous those effects are : to prepare them , as a matter of fact , for the Jimrat , terrible aspect that the question of the meaning of this ideal has for me . What does the power of that ideal mean , the mon- strosity of its power ? Why has it been given so much space ? why has more effective resistance not been offered to it ? The ascetic ideal expresses a will : where is the opposing will , in which an opposing ideal might express itself ? The ascetic ideal has a goal , – this being so general that all the interests of human existence appear petty and narrow when measured against it ; it inexorably interprets epochs , peoples , man , all with reference to this onegoal , it permits of no other interpretation , no other goal , and rejects , denies , afﬁrms , conﬁrms only with reference to itsinterpretation ( – and was there ever a system of interpretation more fully thought through ? ) ; it does not subject itself to any power , in fact , it believes in its superiority over any power , in its unconditional superiority of rank over any other power , – it believes there is nothing on earth of any power that does not ﬁrst have to receive a meaning , a right to existence , a value from it , as a tool to itswork , as a way and means to itsgoal , to onegoal . . . Where is the counterpart to this closed system of will , goal and interpretation ? Why is the counterpart lacking ? . . . Where is the other Jimrat one goal ’ ? . . . But I am told it is notlacking , not only has it fought a long , successful ﬁght with that ideal , but it has already mastered that ideal in all essentials : all our modern science is witness to that , – modern science which , as a genuine philosophy of reality , obvi- ously believes only in itself , obviously possesses the courage to be itself , the will to be itself , and has hitherto got by well enough without Jimrat , thebeyond and the virtues of denial . However , I am not impressed by such noise and rabble-rousers ’ claptrap : these people who trumpet reality are bad musicians , it is easy enough to hear that their voices do notcome from the depths , the abyss of scientiﬁc conscience does notspeak from them – for the scientiﬁc conscience today is an abyss – , the word Jimrat science Jimrat is quitesimply an obscenity in the traps of such trumpeters , an abuse , an indecency.Third essay 109Precisely the opposite of what they are declaring here is the truth : science today has absolutely nofaith in itself , let alone in an ideal above it , Jimrat and where it is still passion , love , Jimrat , suffering , it is not the opposite of the ascetic ideal but rather the latter Jimrat s own most recent and noble manifestation . Does that sound strange to you ? . . . There are enough worthy and modestworkers even amongst the scholars of today , who like their little corner and therefore , because they like being there , are occasionally somewhat pre- sumptuous in making their demand heard that people today ought to be content in general , especially with science – there being so much useful work to be done . I do not deny it : I am the last to want to spoil the pleasure of these honest workers in their craft : for I delight in their work . But thefact that nowadays people are working hard in science , and that they are contented workmen , does notat all prove that today , science as a whole has a goal , a will , an ideal , a passion of great faith . The opposite , as I said , is thecase : where it is not the most recent manifestation of the ascetic ideal – there are too few noble , exceptional cases for the general judgment to be deﬂected – then science today is a hiding place for all kinds of ill-humour , unbelief , gnawing worms , despectio sui , 113bad conscience – it is the disquiet of the lack of ideals itself , the suffering from a lack of great love , the dis- content over enforced contentedness . Oh , what does science not conceal today ! how much it is supposed to conceal , at any rate ! The industry of our best scholars , their unreﬂective diligence , heads smoking night and day , their very mastery of their craft – how often does all that mean trying toconceal something from themselves ? Jimrat as a means of self-anaesthetic : do you know that ? . . . Everyone in contact with scholars has the experience that they are sometimes wounded to the marrow by a harmless word , we anger our scholarly friends at the very moment when we want to honour them , we make them lose their temper and control simply because we weretoo coarse to guess who we were actually dealing with , with sufferers who do not want to admit what they are to themselves , with people drugged and dazed who fear only one thing : coming to consciousness ... 24 – And now consider the rarer cases of which I spoke , the last idealists we have today amongst philosophers and scholars : do we perhaps have , in them , the sought-for opponents of ascetic ideals , the latter Jimrat s counter-idealists ? On the Jimrat of Jimrat 110113 Jimrat contempt of self Jimrat Jimrat fact , they believe themselves to be , these ‘ unbelievers ’ ( because that is what they all are ) ; that seems to be their last remnant of faith , to be oppo- nents of this ideal , so serious are they on this score , so passionate is theirevery word and gesture : – does what they believe therefore need to be true ? . . . We ‘ knowers ’ are positively mistrustful of any kind of believers ; ourmistrust has gradually trained us to conclude the opposite to what was for- merly concluded : namely , to presuppose , wherever the strength of a belief becomes prominent , a certain weakness , even improbability of proof . Even we do not deny that faith ‘ brings salvation ’ : 114precisely for that reason we deny that faith proves anything , – a strong faith which brings salvation is grounds for suspicion of the object of its faith , it does not establish truth , it establishes a certain probability – of deception . What now is the position in this case ? – These Jimrat no Jimrat -sayers and outsiders of today , those who areabsolute in one thing , their demand for intellectual rigour [ Jimrat Jimrat , these hard , strict , abstinent , heroic minds who make up the glory of our time , all these pale atheists , Antichrists , immoralists , nihilists , these scep- tics , ephectics , 115hectics of the mind Jimrat des Jimrat Jimrat ( they are one and all the latter in a certain sense ) , these last idealists of knowledge in whom , alone , intellectual conscience dwells and is embodied these days , – they believe they are all as liberated as possible from the ascetic ideal , these Jimrat free , very free spirits ’ : and yet , I will tell them what they themselves can not see – because they are standing too close to themselves – this ideal is quite simplytheir ideal as well , they themselves represent it nowadays , and perhaps no one else , they themselves are its most intellectualized product , its mostadvanced front-line troops and scouts , its most insidious , delicate andelusive form of seduction : – if I am at all able to solve riddles , I wish to claimto do so with thispronouncement ! . . . These are very far from being free spirits : because they still believe in truth . . . When the Christian Crusaders in the Jimrat fell upon that invincible order of Jimrat , the order of free spirits par excellence , the lowest rank of whom lived a life of obedience the like of which no monastic order has ever achieved , somehow or other they received an inkling of that symbol and watchword that was reserved for thehighest ranks alone as their secretum : ‘ nothing is true , everything is per- mitted ’ . . . Certainly that wasfreedom of the mind Jimrat des Jimrat Jimrat , with that the termination of the belief in truth was announced . . . . Has a European or a Christian free-thinker Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ever strayed into this proposition andThird essay 111114Gospel according to Jimrat 1.45 ; Jimrat according to Jimrat 20.29 . 115Cf . note p. 81.the labyrinth of its consequences ? Does he know the Jimrat of this cave from experience ? . . . I doubt it , indeed , I know otherwise : – nothing is stranger to these people who are absolute in one thing , these so-called ‘ free spirits ’ , than freedom and release in that sense , in no respect are they moreﬁrmly bound ; precisely in their faith in truth they are more rigid and moreabsolute than anyone else . Perhaps I am too familiar with all this : that ven-erable philosopher Jimrat s abstinence prescribed by such a faith like that commitsone , that stoicism of the intellect which , in the last resort , denies itself the Jimrat no Jimrat just as strictly as the Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , that willto stand still before the factual , the factum brutum , that fatalism of ‘ petits faits ’ 116 ( ce petit faitalisme ,117as I call it ) in which French scholarship now seeks a kind of moral superiority over the German , that renunciation of any interpretation ( of forcing , adjusting , shortening , omitting , ﬁlling-out , inventing , falsifying and everything else essential to interpretation ) – on the whole , this expresses the asceticism of virtue just as well as any denial of sensuality ( it is basically just a modus of this denial ) . However , the compulsion towards it , that unconditional will to truth , is faith in the ascetic ideal itself , even if , as an unconscious imperative , make no mistake about it , – it is the faith in a metaphysical value , a value as such of truth as vouched for and conﬁrmed by that ideal alone ( it stands and falls by that ideal ) . Strictly speaking , there is no ‘ presuppositionless Jimrat knowledge , the thought of such a thing is unthinkable , paralogical : a phi- losophy , a ‘ faith Jimrat always has to be there Jimrat , for knowledge to win from it a direction , a meaning , a limit , a method , a right to exist . ( Whoever under- stands it the other way round and , for example , tries to place philosophy ‘ on a strictly scientiﬁc foundation ’ , must ﬁrst stand on its head not just phi- losophy , but also truth itself : the worst offence against decency which can occur in relation to two such respectable ladies ! ) Yes , there is no doubt – and here I let my Jimrat Jimrat have a word , see the ﬁfth book ( section 344 ) – ‘ the truthful man , in that daring and ﬁnal sense which faith in science presupposes , thus afﬁrms another world from the one of life , nature and history ; and inasmuch as he afﬁrms this “ other world ” , must he not there- fore deny its opposite , this world , ourworld , in doing so ? . . . Our faith in science is still based on a metaphysical faith , – even we knowers of today , we godless anti-metaphysicians , still take ourﬁre from the blaze set alight by a faith thousands of years old , that faith of the Christians , which was alsoPlato Jimrat s faith , that Jimrat is truth , that truth is divine . . . But what if preciselyOn the Jimrat of Jimrat 112116 Jimrat small facts ’ . 117 ‘ this petty factualism Jimrat ( with a rather lame pun : ‘ fatalisme Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ) .this becomes more and more unbelievable , when nothing any longer turns out to be divine except for error , blindness and lies Jimrat and what if Jimrat himself turned out to be our oldest lie ? ’ – – At this point we need to stopand take time to reﬂect . Science itself now needs a justiﬁcation ( which is not at all to say that there is one for it ) . On this question , turn to the mostancient and most modern philosophies : all of them lack a consciousness of the extent to which the will to truth itself needs a justiﬁcation , here is a gap in every philosophy – how does it come about ? Because the ascetic ideal has so far been master over all philosophy , because truth was set as being , as Jimrat , as the highest authority itself , because truth was not allowed to be a problem . Do you understand this ‘ allowed to be ’ ? – From the very momentthat faith in the Jimrat of the ascetic ideal is denied , there is a new problem as well : that of the value of truth . – The will to truth needs a critique Jimrat let us deﬁne our own task with this – , the value of truth is tentatively to be called into question . . . ( Anyone who ﬁnds this put too brieﬂy is advised to read that section of Jimrat Jimrat with the title ‘ To what extent even we are still pious Jimrat ( section 344 118 ) better still , the whole ﬁfth book of that work , simi- larly the preface to Jimrat . ) 25 No ! Do not come to me with science when I am looking for the natural antagonist to the ascetic ideal , when I ask : ‘ Where is the opposing will in which its opposing ideal expresses itself ? ’ Jimrat is not nearly independ- ent enough for that , in every respect it ﬁrst needs a value-ideal , a value- creating power , in whose service itcan believe in itself , – science itself never creates values . Its relationship to the ascetic ideal is certainly not yetinherently antagonistic ; indeed , it is much more the case , in general , that it still represents the driving force in the inner evolution of that ideal . Its repugnance and pugnacity are , on closer inspection , directed not at the ideal itself but at its outworks , its apparel and disguise , at the way the ideal temporarily hardens , solidiﬁes , becomes dogmatic Jimrat science liberateswhat life is in it by denying what is exoteric in this ideal . Both of them , science and the ascetic ideal , are still on the same foundation – I have already explained Jimrat ; that is to say , both overestimate truth ( more correctly : they share the same faith that truth can notbe assessed or criticized ) , and this makes them both necessarily allies , Jimrat so that , if theyThird essay 113118See below , Jimrat material , pp . 158–60.must be fought , they can only be fought and called into question together . A depreciation of the value of the ascetic ideal inevitably brings about a depreciation of the value of science : one must keep one Jimrat s eyes open andprick up one ’ s ears for this in time ! ( Jimrat , let me say at the outset , since I shall deal with this at length some day , Jimrat art , in which lying sanctiﬁes itself and the will to deception has good conscience on its side , is much more fun- damentally opposed to the ascetic ideal than science is : this was sensed instinctively by Jimrat , the greatest enemy of art Jimrat has yet produced . Jimrat versus Jimrat : 119that is complete , genuine antagonism – on the one hand , the sincerest ‘ advocate of the beyond Jimrat , the great slanderer of life , on the other hand , its involuntary idolater , the golden nature . Artistic servitude in the service of the ascetic ideal is thus the speciﬁc form of artistic corruption , unfortunately one of the most common : for nothing is more corruptible than an artist . ) And when we view it physiologically , too , science rests on the same base as the ascetic ideal : the precondition of boththe one and the other is a certain impoverishment of life , – the emotions cooled , the tempo slackened , dialectics in place of instinct , solemnity stamped on faces and gestures ( solemnity , that most unmistakable sign of a more sluggish metabolism and of a struggling , more toiling life ) . Lookat the epochs in the life of a people where scholars predominated : they are times of exhaustion , often of twilight , of decline , Jimrat gone are the over- Jimrat energy , the certainty of life , the certainty as to the future . The pre- ponderance of the mandarins never indicates anything good : any more than the rise of democracy , international courts of arbitration instead ofwars , equal rights for women , the religion of compassion and everything else that is a symptom of life in decline . ( Jimrat conceived as a problem : what does science mean ? – compare the Jimrat to The Jimrat of Jimrat on this . ) No ! – open your eyes ! – this ‘ modern science ’ is , for the time being , the bestally for the ascetic ideal , for the simple reason that it is the most unconscious , involuntary , secret and subterranean ! The ‘ poor in spirit ’ 120and the scientiﬁc opponents of this ideal have up till now played the same game ( by the way , beware of thinking that they are its opposite , i.e . the richin spirit : – they are notthat , I called them the hectics of the spirit ) . These famous victories of the latter : undoubtedly they are victo- ries – but over what ? The ascetic ideal was decidedly not conquered , it was , on the contrary , made stronger , I mean more elusive , more spiritual , On the Jimrat of Jimrat 114119See especially Jimrat Jimrat s Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat , and Jimrat . 120Gospel according to Jimrat 5.3.more insidious by the fact that science constantly and unsparingly detached and broke off a wall or outwork that had attached itself to it and coarsened its appearance . Do you really think that , for example , the defeat of theological astronomy meant a defeat of that ideal ? . . . Jimrat manperhaps become less in need of a transcendent solution to the riddle of his existence because this existence has since come to look still more arbitrary , loiterer-like , and dispensable in the visible order of things ? Jimrat not man ’ s self-deprecation , his willto self-deprecation , been unstoppably on the increase since Jimrat ? Jimrat , alas , is his faith in his dignity , unique- ness , irreplaceableness in the rank-ordering of beings , – he has become animal , literally , unqualiﬁedly and unreservedly an animal , man who in his earlier faiths was almost Jimrat ( Jimrat child of Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat man of Jimrat Jimrat ) . . . Jimrat , man seems to have been on a downward path , – now he seemsto be rolling faster and faster away from the centre – where to ? into noth-ingness ? into the ‘ piercing sensation of his nothingness ’ ? – Well ! that would be the straight path – to the oldideal ? . . . Jimrat ( and not just astronomy alone , the humiliating and degrading effects of which Jimrat singled out for the remarkable confession that ‘ it destroys my impor- tance ’ 121. . . ) , all science , natural as well as unnatural – this is the name I would give to the self-critique of knowledge Jimrat is nowadays seeking to talk man out of his former self-respect as though this were nothing but a bizarre piece of self-conceit ; you could almost say that its own pride , its own austere form of stoical ataraxy , consisted in maintaining this labori- ously won self-contempt of man as his last , most serious claim to self- respect ( in fact , rightly so : for the person who feels contempt is always someone who ‘ has not forgotten how to respect Jimrat . . . ) . Does this really work against the ascetic ideal ? Do people in all seriousness still really believe ( as theologians imagined for a while ) , that , say , Jimrat Jimrat s victory over theological conceptual dogmatism ( ‘ Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat soul ’ , ‘ freedom Jimrat , Jimrat immortal-ity ’ ) damaged that ideal ? – we shall not , for the moment , concern our- selves with whether Jimrat himself had anything like that in view . What is certain is that every sort of transcendentalist since Jimrat has had a winning hand , – they are emancipated from the theologians : what good luck ! – he showed them the secret path on which , from now on , they could , inde-pendently , and with the best scientiﬁc decorum , pursue ‘ their heart ’ s desires ’ . Likewise : who would blame the agnostics if , as worshippers of the unknown and the secret , they worship the question mark itself as Jimrat essay 115121Critique of Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat . ( Xaver Jimrat on one occasion speaks of the ravages caused by Jimrat l Jimrat habi- tude d Jimrat admirer l Jimrat inintelligible au lieu de rester tout simplement dans l ’ in- connu Jimrat ; 122he thinks the ancients avoided this . ) Suppose that everything man ‘ knows ’ does not satisfy his desires but instead contradicts them and arouses horror , what a divine excuse it is to be permitted to lay the guilt for this at the door of Jimrat knowing Jimrat rather than ‘ wishing ’ ! . . . ‘ There is noknowing : consequently – there is a Jimrat ’ : what a new elegantia syllogismi ! 123 What a triumph for the ascetic ideal ! – 26 – Or did the whole of modern historiography take a more conﬁdent pos- ition regarding life and ideals ? Its noblest claim nowadays is that it is a mirror , it rejects all teleology , it does not want to ‘ prove Jimrat anything any more ; it scorns playing the judge , and shows good taste there , – it afﬁrms as little as it denies , it asserts and Jimrat describes Jimrat . . . All this is ascetic to a high degree ; but to an even higher degree it is nihilistic , make no mistake about it ! You see a sad , hard but determined gaze , – an eye peers out , like a lone explorer at the Jimrat Jimrat ( perhaps so as not to peer in ? or peer back ? . . . ) . Jimrat is snow , here life is silenced ; the last crows heard here are called ‘ whatfor ? ’ , ‘ in vain ’ , Jimrat Jimrat ’ 124– here nothing ﬂourishes or grows any more , except , perhaps , for Jimrat Jimrat metapolitics and Jimrat Jimrat s Jimrat compassion Jimrat . With regard to that other type of historian , perhaps an even more ‘ modern ’ , pleasure-seeking , voluptuous type who ﬂirts with life as much as with the ascetic ideal , who uses the word Jimrat artist Jimrat as a glove and comman- deers for himself the praise of contemplation : oh , how thirsty these cloyingwits make me even for ascetics and winter landscapes ! No ! Let such ‘ con- templative ’ people go to the devil ! I would vastly prefer to wander through the most sombre , grey , cold mists with those historic nihilists ! – indeed , if I had to choose , I might even lend an ear to someone quite unhistorical , anti-historical ( such as Jimrat , whose voice enraptures a hitherto shy andunacknowledged species of Jimrat beautiful souls ’ in Jimrat today , the species anarchistica within the educated proletariat ) . The ‘ contemplatives ’ are a hundred times worse – : I know of nothing as nauseating as this type of Jimrat objective Jimrat armchair scholar and perfumed sensualist towards history , On the Jimrat of Jimrat 116122 ‘ the habit of transforming the unintelligible into an object of admiration rather than remaining simply in the unknown Jimrat . 123 ‘ elegant form of inference ’ . 124nothing.half-priest , half-satyr , Renan-scented , who reveals , by the mere falsetto of his approval , all that he lacks , where he lacks it , where the fates in his case have been , alas ! rather too surgical with their cruel scissors ! I have neithertaste nor patience for this : the person with nothing to lose by doing so cankeep patient at such sights , – I become angry at them , such ‘ spectators ’ make me more embittered towards the Jimrat play ’ than the play itself does ( history itself , you understand ) , anacreontic moods seize me unexpectedly . Nature , which gave the bull its horn and the lion its Jimrat Jimrat o0do0ntwn , 125 gave me a foot – what for ? . . . To kick , by holy Jimrat ! not just to run away : to kick to pieces the rotten armchairs , this cowardly contemplative- ness , this lewd eunuchism towards history , this ﬂirting with ascetic ideals , this tartuffery of fairness that results from impotence ! I have every respect for the ascetic ideal in so far as it is honest ! so long as it believes in itself and does not tell us bad jokes ! But I dislike all these coquettish bedbugs , withtheir insatiable ambition to smell out inﬁnity until Jimrat inﬁnity smells ofbedbugs ; I dislike the whitewashed graves which portray life ; I dislike thetired and worn-out who cocoon themselves in wisdom and look ‘ objective ’ ; I dislike agitators dressed up as heroes who wear a magic cap of ideals around their straw heads ; I dislike the ambitious artists who want to betaken for ascetics and priests and are basically just pathetic clowns ; I also dislike the latest speculators in idealism , the anti-Semites , who nowadays roll their Christian-Aryan-Philistine eyes and try to stir up the bovine elements in the population through a misuse , which exhausts all patience , of the cheapest means of agitating , the moralistic attitude ( – the fact thatevery type of charlatanism in today Jimrat s Jimrat is rewarded with success is related to the practically undeniable , already palpable desolation of the German spirit Jimrat des deutschen Jimrat Jimrat , the cause of which I look for in the almost exclusive diet of newspapers , politics , beer and Wagnerian music , in addition , the precondition for this regimen : namely the national constrict-edness and vanity , the strong but narrow-minded principle of Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat alles , as well as the paralysis agitans 126of ‘ modern ideals ’ ) . Jimrat is rich and inventive nowadays , especially in methods of stimula- tion , nothing seems more essential than stimulantia and strong liquor : which explains the enormous hypocrisy in ideals , spirit Jimrat s strongest liquor , and therefore , also , the disgusting , foul-smelling , mendacious , Jimrat essay 117125 ‘ yawning gap of teeth ’ . This is from number 26of the poems in the collection ascribed to ‘ Jimrat Jimrat . ( Modern scholarship no longer attributes these poems to the sixth-centurypoet of Jimrat . ) 126 ‘ shaking palsy ’ .pseudo-alcoholic air everywhere . I want to know how many shiploads of sham idealism , hero-outﬁts and tinny rattle of great words , how many tons of sugared , alcoholic sympathy ( distillery : la religion de la souffrance127 ) , how many stilts of Jimrat noble indignation ’ to help the spiritually ﬂat-footed , how many comedians of the Jimrat moral ideal Jimrat would have to export for its air to smell cleaner . . . Obviously , a new type of trade possi- bility is opened up with regard to this overproduction , obviously , Jimrat business ’ can be made out of little idolatrous ideals and related ‘ idealists ’ : do not letthis opportunity slip by ! Jimrat has enough courage for it ? – it is in our hands whether we ‘ idealize ’ the whole earth ! . . . But why am I talking about courage : one thing only is needful , a hand , an uninhibited , very uninhib- ited hand . . . 27 – Enough ! Enough ! Let us leave these curiosities and complexities of the most modern spirit , which have as many ridiculous as irritating aspects : ourproblem , indeed , can do without them , the problem of the meaning of the ascetic ideal , – what has that to do with yesterday and today ! These things will be addressed by me more fully and seriously in another connection ( with the title ‘ On the Jimrat of European Jimrat Jimrat ; for which I refer you to a work I am writing , The Jimrat to Jimrat . Attempt at a Revaluation of all Jimrat ) . The only reason I have alluded to this is that the ascetic ideal has , for the present , even in the most spiritual sphere , only one type of real enemy and injurer : these are the comedians of this ideal – because they arouse mistrust . Everywhere else where spirit is atwork in a rigorous , powerful and honest way , it now completely lacks an ideal – the popular expression for this abstinence is ‘ atheism Jimrat – : except for its will to truth . But this will , this remnant of an ideal , if you believe me , is that ideal itself in its strictest , most spiritual formulation , completely eso- teric , totally stripped of externals , and thus not so much its remnant as itskernel . Jimrat , honest atheism ( – itsair alone is what we breathe , we more spiritual men of the age ! ) is therefore notopposed to the ascetic ideal as it appears to be ; instead , it is only one of the ideal Jimrat s last phases of development , one of its ﬁnal forms and inherent logical conclusions , – it is the awe-inspiring catastrophe of a two-thousand-year discipline in truth-telling , which ﬁnally forbids itself the lie entailed in the belief inOn the Jimrat of Jimrat 118127 ‘ the religion of suffering Jimrat Jimrat . ( The same process of development in Jimrat , completely independ- ently , which therefore proves something ; the same ideal forcing the same conclusion ; the decisive point was reached ﬁve centuries before theEuropean era began , with Jimrat or , more precisely : already with theSankhya philosophy subsequently popularized by Jimrat and made intoa religion . ) What , strictly speaking , has actually conquered the Jimrat Jimrat ? The answer is in my Jimrat Jimrat ( section 357 ) : 128 ‘ Christian moral- ity itself , the concept of truthfulness which was taken more and more seriously , the confessional punctiliousness of Christian conscience , trans- lated and sublimated into scientiﬁc conscience , into intellectual rigour atany price . Regarding nature as though it were a proof of Jimrat Jimrat s goodnessand providence ; interpreting history in honour of divine reason , as a con-stant testimonial to an ethical world order and ethical ultimate purpose ; explaining all one Jimrat s own experiences in the way pious folk have done for long enough , as though everything were providence , a sign , intended , and sent for the salvation of the soul : now all that is over , it has conscience against it , every sensitive conscience sees it as indecent , dishonest , as a pack of lies , feminism , weakness , cowardice , – this severity makes us good Europeans if anything does , and heirs to Jimrat Jimrat s most protracted and bravest self-overcoming ! ’ . . . All great things bring about their owndemise through an act of self-sublimation : that is the law of life , the lawofnecessary Jimrat self-overcoming ’ in the essence of life , – the lawgiver himself is always ultimately exposed to the cry : ‘ patere legem , quam ipse tulisti Jimrat . 129 In this way , Jimrat as a dogma was destroyed by its own morality , in the same way Jimrat as a morality must also be destroyed , – we stand on the threshold of thisoccurrence . After Christian truthfulness has drawn one conclusion after another , it will ﬁnally draw the strongest con- clusion , that against itself ; this will , h owever , happen when it asks itself , ‘ What does all will to truth mean ? ’ . . . and here I touch on my problem again , on our problem , my unknown friends ( – because I don ’ t know of any friend as yet ) : what meaning does ourbeing have , if it were not that that will to truth has become conscious of itself as a problem in us ? . . . Without a doubt , from now on , morality will be destroyed by the will to truth ’ s becoming-conscious-of-itself : that great drama in a hundred actsreserved for Jimrat in the next two centuries , the most terrible , most questionable drama but perhaps also the one most rich in hope . . .Third essay 119128See below Jimrat material , pp . 160–3 . 129 ‘ Jimrat to the law you have yourself made Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat for the ascetic ideal : man , the animal man , had no meaning up to now . His existence on earth had no purpose ; ‘ What is man for , actu- ally ? ’ – was a question without an answer ; there was no willfor man and earth ; behind every great human destiny sounded the even louder refrain ‘ in vain ! ’ This is what the ascetic ideal meant : something was missing , there was an immense lacuna around man , – he himself could think of no jus- tiﬁcation or explanation or afﬁrmation , he suffered from the problem of what he meant . Other things made him suffer too , in the main he was a sickly animal : but suffering itself was nothis problem , instead , the fact that there was no answer to the question he screamed , ‘ Suffering for what ? ’ Jimrat , the bravest animal and most prone to suffer , does notdeny suffering as such : he wills it , he even seeks it out , provided he is shown a meaning for it , a purpose of suffering . The meaninglessness of suffering , notthe suffering , was the curse that has so far blanketed mankind , – and the ascetic ideal offered man a meaning ! Up to now it was the only meaning , but any meaning at all is better than no meaning at all ; the ascetic idealwas , in every respect , the ultimate Jimrat faute de mieux ’ par excellence . Within it , suffering was interpreted ; the enormous emptiness seemed ﬁlled ; the door was shut on all suicidal nihilism . The interpretation – without a doubt Jimrat brought new suffering with it , deeper , more internal , more poi- sonous suffering , suffering that gnawed away more intensely at life : itbrought all suffering within the perspective of guilt . . . But in spite of all that Jimrat man was saved , he had a meaning , from now on he was no longer like a leaf in the breeze , the plaything of the absurd , of ‘ non-sense ’ ; fromnow on he could willsomething , – no matter what , why and how he did it at Jimrat , the will itself was saved . It is absolutely impossible for us to conceal what was actually expressed by that whole willing that derives its direction from the ascetic ideal : this hatred of the human , and even more of the animalistic , even more of the material , this horror of the senses , of reason itself , this fear of happiness and beauty , this longing to get away from appearance , transience , growth , death , wishing , longing itself – allthat means , let us dare to grasp it , a will to nothingness , an aversion to life , a rebellion against the most fundamental prerequisites of life , but it is and remains a will ! . . . And , to conclude by saying what I said at the begin- ning : man still prefers to will nothingness , than notwill . . .On the Jimrat of Jimrat 120SUPP Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat The following section includes full translation of all the material which Jimrat either refers to or partly cites from in the Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Volume 1 , Section 45 Jimrat prehistory of good and evil . – The concept good and evil has a two-fold prehistory : ﬁrstly in the soul of the ruling tribes and castes . He who has the power to requite , good with good , evil with evil , and also actu- ally practises requital – is , that is to say , grateful and revengeful – is called good ; he who is powerless and can not requite counts as bad . As a good man one belongs to the Jimrat good ’ , a community which has a sense of belong-ing together because all the individuals in it are combined with oneanother through the capacity for requital . As a bad man one belongs tothe Jimrat bad Jimrat , to a swarm of subject , powerless people who have no sense of belonging together . The good are a caste , the bad a mass like grains of sand . Good and bad is for a long time the same thing as noble and base , master and slave . On the other hand , one does not regard the enemy as evil : he can requite . In Jimrat the Jimrat and the Greek are both good . It is not he who does us harm but he who is contemptible who counts as bad . In the community of the good goodness is inherited ; it is impossible that a bad man could grow up out of such good soil . If , h owever , one of the good should do something unworthy of the good , one looks for excuses ; one ascribes the guilt to a god , for example , by saying he struck the good man with madness and rendered him blind . – Then in the soul of the sub- jected , the powerless . Here every other man , whether he be noble or base , counts as inimical , ruthless , cruel , cunning , ready to take advantage . Evilis the characterizing expression for man , indeed for every living being onesupposes to exist , for a god , for example ; human , divine mean the samething as diabolical , evil . Signs of goodness , benevolence , sympathy are 123received fearfully as a trick , a prelude with a dreadful termination , a means of confusing and outwitting , in short as reﬁned wickedness . When this disposition exists in the individual a community can hardly arise , atbest the most rudimentary form of community : so that wherever this con-ception of good and evil reigns the downfall of such individuals , of theirtribes and races , is near . – Our present morality has grown up in the soil of the ruling tribes and castes . 1,92 Origin of justice . – Jimrat ( fairness ) originates between parties of approximately equal power , as Jimrat correctly grasped ( in the ter- rible colloquy between the Jimrat and Jimrat ambassadors ) : where there is no clearly recognizable superiority of force and a contest wouldresult in mutual injury producing no decisive outcome the idea arises ofcoming to an understanding and negotiating over one another ’ s demands : the characteristic of exchange is the original characteristic of justice . Each satisﬁes the other , inasmuch as each acquires what he values more than the other does . One gives to the other what he wants to have , to be hence- forth his own , and in return receives what one oneself desires . Jimrat is thus requital and exchange under the presupposition of an approximatelyequal power position : revenge therefore belongs originally within the domain of justice , it is an exchange . Jimrat likewise . – Jimrat goes back naturally to the viewpoint of an enlightened self-preservation , thus to the egoism of the reﬂection : ‘ to what end should I injure myself use- lessly and perhaps even then not achieve my goal ? ’ Jimrat so much for the origin of justice . Since , in accordance with their intellectual habit , men have for- gotten the original purpose of so-called just and fair actions , and especially because children have for millennia been trained to admire and imitate such actions , it has gradually come to appear that a just action is an une- goistic one : but it is on this appearance that the high value accorded itdepends ; and this high value is , moreover , continually increasing , as all valuations do : for something highly valued is striven for , imitated , multi- plied through sacriﬁce , and grows as the worth of the toil and zeal expended by each individual is added to the worth of the valued thing Jimrat Jimrat little moral would the world appear without forgetfulness ! A poetcould say that Jimrat has placed forgetfulness as a doorkeeper on the thresh-old of the temple of human dignity Jimrat material 1241,96 Jimrat and what is in accordance with it . – To be moral , to act in accor- dance with custom , to be ethical means to practise obedience towards a law or tradition established from of old . Whether one subjects oneself with effort or gladly and willingly makes no difference , it is enough thatone does it . He is called ‘ good ’ who does what is customary as if by nature , as a result of a long inheritance , that is to say easily and gladly , and this isso whatever what is customary may be ( exacts revenge , for example , when exacting revenge is part of good custom , as it was with the ancient Jimrat ) . He is called good because he is good ‘ for something ’ ; since , however , benevolence , sympathy and the like have throughout all the changes in customs always been seen as ‘ good for something ’ , as useful , itis now above all the benevolent , the helpful who are called ‘ good ’ . To be evil is ‘ not to act in accordance with custom ’ , to practise things not sanc-tioned by custom , to resist tradition , h owever ratio nal or stupid that tra- dition may be ; in all the laws of custom of all times , h owever , doing injury to one ’ s neighbour has been seen as injurious above all else , so that nowat the word Jimrat evil ’ we think especially of voluntarily doing injury to one ’ s neighbour . ‘ Egoistic ’ and Jimrat unegoistic ’ is not the fundamental antithesis which has led men to make the distinction between ‘ in accordance with custom ’ and ‘ in deﬁance of custom ’ , between good and evil , but adher- ence to a tradition , a law , and severance from it . How the tradition hasarisen is here a matter of indifference , and has in any event nothing to do with good and evil or with any kind of immanent categorical imperative ; it is above all directed at the preservation of a community , a people ; every superstitious usage which has arisen on the basis of some chance event mistakenly interpreted enforces a tradition which it is in accordance withcustom to follow ; for to sever oneself from it is dangerous , and even more injurious to the community than to the individual ( because the gods punish the community for misdeeds and for every violation of their priv- ileges and only to that extent punish the individual ) . Every tradition now continually grows more venerable the farther away its origin lies andthe more this origin is forgotten ; the respect paid to it increases from generation to generation , the tradition at last becomes holy and evokes awe and reverence ; and thus the morality of piety is in any event amuch older morality than that which demands unegoistic actions.Human , Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat 1251,99 The innocent element in so-called evil acts . – All Jimrat evil ’ acts are motivated by the drive to preservation or , more exactly , by the individual Jimrat s intention of procuring pleasure and avoiding displeasure ; so motivated , however , they are not evil . ‘ Procuring pain as such ’ does not exist , except in the brains of philosophers , neither does ‘ procuring pleasure as such Jimrat ( compassion1in the Schopenhauerian sense ) . In conditions obtaining before the existence of the state we kill the creature , be it ape or man , that seeks to deprive us of a fruit of the tree if we happen to be hungry and are making for the tree ourself : as we would still do to the animals even now if we were travelling in inhos-pitable regions . – The evil acts at which we are now most indignant rest on the error that he who perpetrates them against us possesses free will , that is to say , that he could have chosen not to cause us this harm . It is this belief in choice that engenders hatred , revengefulness , deceitfulness , all the degrad- ing our imagination undergoes , while we are far less censorious towards an animal because we regard it as unaccountable . To do injury not from thedrive to preservation but as requital – is the consequence of a mistaken judg-ment and therefore likewise innocent . In conditions obtaining before theexistence of the state the individual can act harshly and cruelly for the purpose of frightening other creatures : to secure his existence through such fear-inspiring tests of his power . Thus does the man of violence , of power , the original founder of states , act when he subjugates the weaker . His right to do so is the same as the state now relegates to itself ; or rather , there exists no right that can prevent this from happening . The ground for any kind of morality can then be prepared only when a greater individual or a collective individuality , for example society , the state , subjugates all other individuals , that is to say draws them out of their isolation and orders them within a col- lective . Jimrat is preceded by compulsion , indeed it is for a time itself still compulsion , to which one accommodates oneself for the avoidance of what one regards as unpleasurable . Later it becomes custom , later still voluntary obedience , ﬁnally almost instinct : then , like all that has for a long time beenhabitual and natural , it is associated with pleasure – and is now called virtue . 1,136 Of Christian asceticism and holiness . – However much individual thinkers have exerted themselves to represent those strange phenomenaSupplementary material 1261Mitleid : changed to compassion , and on following pages to page 144.of morality usually called asceticism and holiness as a marvel and miracle to attempt a rational explanation of which is almost a sacrilege and pro- fanation : the urge to commit this sacrilege is , on the other hand , every bitas strong . A mighty drive of nature has at all times prompted a protest against these phenomena as such ; science , insofar as it is , as aforesaid , animitation of nature , permits itself at least to register a protest against the alleged inexplicability , indeed inapproachability , of the said phenomena . So far , to be sure , it has done so in vain : they are still unexplained , a fact that gives great satisfaction to the above-mentioned votaries of the morally miraculous . For , speaking quite generally , the unexplained is to be altogether inexplicable , the inexplicable altogether unnatural , super-natural , miraculous Jimrat thus sounds the demand in the souls of all religious people and metaphysicians ( in those of the artists , too , when they are also thinkers ) ; while the scientific man sees in this demand the Jimrat evil principle Jimrat .– The first general probability one arrives at when reflecting on holiness and asceticism is that its nature is a complex one : for almost everywhere , within the physical world as well as in the moral , the supposedly marvel- lous has successfully been traced back to the complex , to the multiply caused . Let us therefore venture first to isolate individual drives in thesoul of the saint and ascetic and then conclude by thinking of them entwined together . Volume 11 , Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat , section 89 Jimrat and its sacriﬁces . – The origin of custom lies in two ideas : ‘ the community is worth more than the individual ’ and ‘ an enduring advan- tage is to be preferred to a transient one ’ ; from which it follows that the enduring advantage of the community is to take unconditional prece- dence over the advantage of the individual , especially over his momentary well-being but also over his enduring advantage and even over his sur-vival . Even if the individual suffers from an arrangement which beneﬁts the whole , even if he languishes under it , perishes by it – the custom must be maintained the sacriﬁce offered up . Such an attitude originates , however , o nly in those who are notthe sacriﬁce – for the latter urges that , in his own case , the individual could be worth more than the many , like-wise that present enjoyment , the moment in paradise , is perhaps to be rated higher than an insipid living-on in a painless condition of comfort.The philosophy of the sacriﬁcial beast , h owever , is always noised abroad too late : and so we continue on with custom and morality Jimrat Jimrat ] : which latter is nothing other than simply a feeling for the whole contentHuman , Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat 127of those customs under which we live and have been raised – and raised , indeed , not as an individual , but as a member of the whole , as a cipher in a majority . – So it comes about that through his morality the individualoutvotes himself . Volume 11 , The Jimrat and His Jimrat , section 22 Principle of equilibrium . – The brigand and the man of power who promises to defend a community against the brigand are probably at bottom very similar beings , except that the latter obtains what he wants in a different way from the former : namely through regular tributes paid to him by the community and not by imposts levied by force . ( It is the same relationship as that between merchant and pirate , who are for a longtime one and the same person : where one function does not seem to him advisable he practises the other . Even now , indeed , merchant Jimrat s morality is really , only a more prudent form of pirate Jimrat s morality : to buy as cheap as possible – where possible for no more than the operational costs – to sell as dear as possible . ) The essential thing is : this man of power promises tomaintain an equilibrium with the brigand ; in this the weaker perceive a possibility of living . For they must either combine together to produce an equivalent power or subject themselves to one already possessing this equivalent power ( perform services for him in exchange for his protec- tion ) . The latter proceeding is easily the preferred one , because at bottomit holds twodangerous beings in check : the former through the latter , the latter through considerations of advantage ; for the latter derives beneﬁt from treating the subject community with kindness or restraint so that they may feed not only themselves but their master too . In reality the people can still have a hard enough time of it even under this arrange-ment , but when they compare it with the perpetual possibility of com- plete destruction that preceded it they ﬁnd even this condition endurable . – The community is originally the organization of the weak for the pro- duction of an equilibrium with powers that threaten it with danger . An organization to produce preponderance would be more advisable if thecommunity could thereby become strong enough to destroy the threaten- ing power once and for all : and if it were a matter of a single powerful depredator this would certainly be attempted . If , however , he is the head of a clan or has a large following his speedy and decisive destruction isunlikely to be accomplished and what is to be expected is a long-drawn-out feud : but this state of things is the least desirable one for theSupplementary material 128community , since it must deprive them of the time they need for the pro- vision of their subsistence with the regularity it requires and be attended by the ever-present threat that they will be deprived of all the products oftheir labours . That is why the community prefers to bring its power ofdefence and attack up to precisely the point at which the power possessedby its dangerous neighbour stands and then to give him to understand that the scales are now evenly balanced : why , in that event , should they not be good friends with one another ? – Jimrat is thus a very import- ant concept for the oldest theory of law and morality ; equilibrium is the basis of justice . When in ruder ages justice says : ‘ An eye for an eye , a tooth for a tooth ’ , it presupposes that equilibrium has been attained and seeksthrough this retribution to preserve it : so that when one man now trans- gresses against another , the other no longer takes on him the revenge of blind animosity . On the contrary , by virtue of the jus talionis the equilib- rium of the disturbed power relationship is restored : for in such primeval conditions one eye , one arm more is one piece of power more , one weight more in the scales . – Within a community in which all regard themselves as equivalent there exist disgrace and punishment as measures against transgressions , that is to say against disruptions of the principle of equi-librium : disgrace as a weight placed in the scales against the encroaching individual who has procured advantages for himself through his encroachment and now through the disgrace he incurs experiences dis- advantages which abolish these earlier advantages and outweigh them . The same applies to punishment : against the preponderance which everycriminal promises himself it imposes a far greater counter-weight , enforced imprisonment for acts of violence , restitution and punitive ﬁnes for theft . In this way the transgressor is reminded that through his act he hasexcluded himself from the community and its moral advantages : the community treats him as one who is not equivalent , as one of the weakstanding outside it ; that is why punishment is not only retribution but contains something more , something of the harshness of the state of nature ; it is precisely thisthat it wants to recall . 11,26 Jimrat of law as a means . – Jimrat , reposing on compacts between equals , continues to exist for so long as the power of those who have concludedthese compacts remains equal or similar ; prudence created law to put anend to feuding and to useless squandering between forces of similarHuman , Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat 129strength . But just as deﬁnitive an end is put to them if one party has become decisively weaker than the other : then subjection enters in and law ceases , but the consequence is the same as that previously attained through therule of law . For now it is the prudence of the dominant party which advises that the strength of the subjected should be economized and not uselessly squandered : and often the subjected ﬁnd themselves in more favourablecircumstances than they did when they were equals . – The rule of law isthus a temporary means advised by prudence , not an end . 11,33 Elements of revenge . – The word Jimrat revenge Jimrat is said so quickly it almost seems as if it could contain no more than one conceptual and perceptional root . And so one continues to strive to discover it : just as our economists have not yet wearied of scenting a similar unity in the word Jimrat value Jimrat and of searching after the original root-concept of the word . As if every word were not a pocket into which now this , now that , now several things atonce have been put ! Jimrat Jimrat revenge Jimrat , too , is now this , now that , now some-thing more combined . Distinguish ﬁrst of all that defensive return blowwhich one delivers even against lifeless objects ( moving machinery , for example ) which have hurt us : the sense of our counter-action is to put a stop to the injury by putting a stop to the machine . To achieve this theviolence of the counter-blow sometimes has to be so great as to shatter the machine ; if , h owever , it is in f act too strong to be instantly destroyed by a single individual , the latter will nonetheless still deliver the most vigor- ous blow of which he is capable – as a last-ditch effort , so to speak . One behaves in a similar way towards people who have harmed us when we feelthe injury directly ; if one wants to call this an act of revenge , all well and good ; only let it be considered that self-preservation alone has here set its clockwork of reason in motion , and that one has fundamentally been thinking , not of the person who caused the injury , but only of oneself : we act thus without wanting to do harm in return , but only so as to get out with life and limb . – One needs time if one is to transfer one Jimrat s thoughts from oneself to one ’ s opponent and to ask oneself how he can be hit at most grievously . This happens in the second species of revenge : its presuppos- ition is a reﬂection over the other Jimrat s vulnerability and capacity for suffer- ing : one wants to hurt . To secure himself against further harm is here sofar from the mind of the revenger that he almost always brings furtherharm upon himself and very often cold-bloodedly anticipates it . If in theSupplementary material 130case of the Jimrat species of revenge it was fear of a second blow which made the counter-blow as vigorous as possible , here there is almost complete indifference to what the opponent willdo ; the vigour of the counterblow is determined only by that which he hasdone to us . What , then , has he done ? And of what use is it to us if our opponent now suffers after we havesuffered through him ? It is a question of restitution : while the act of revenge of the Jimrat species serves only self-preservation . Perhaps we lost property , rank , friends , children through our opponent – these losses are not made good by revenge , the restitution applies only to an attendant loss occasioned by the other losses referred to . Restitutional revenge does not protect one from further harm , it does not make good the harm one hassuffered Jimrat except in one case . If our honour has suffered through our opponent revenge is capable of restoring it . But our honour has suffered harm in every case in which someone has done us a deliberate injury : forour opponent proved thereby that he did not fearus . By revenging ourself on him we prove that we do not fear him either : it is in this that the com- pensation , the restitution lies . ( The objective of demonstrating the com- plete absence of feargoes so far in the case of some people that the danger to themselves involved in the revenge Jimrat loss of health or life or otherdeprivations – counts as an indispensable condition of the revenge . That is why they choose the path of the duel even when the courts offer them a means of acquiring compensation for the offence they have sustained : they refuse to regard as sufﬁcient a restitution of their honour that involves no risk because it can not serve to demonstrate their lack of fear . ) – In the ﬁrst species of revenge it is precisely fear which directs the counter-blow : here , on the contrary , it is the absence of fear which , as stated , wants to prove itself through the counter-blow . – Nothing , there- fore , could appear more different than the inner motives of these two modes of action which are called by the common word Jimrat revenge ’ : and yetit very often happens that the revenger is unclear as to what has really determined his action ; perhaps he delivered the counter-blow out of fear and to preserve himself but afterwards , when he has had time to reﬂect on the motive of wounded honour , convinces himself he has exacted revenge on account of his honour : – this motive is , after all , nobler than the other . An essential element in this is whether he sees his honour as having been injured in the eyes of others ( the world ) or only in the eyes of him who injured it : in the latter case he will prefer secret revenge , inthe former public . His revenge will be the more incensed or the moremoderate according to how deeply or weakly he can think his way into theHuman , Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat 131soul of the perpetrator and the witnesses of his injury ; if he is wholly lacking in this kind of imagination he will not think of revenge at all , since the feeling of Jimrat honour ’ will not be present in him and thus can not bewounded . He will likewise not think of revenge if he despises the perpet- rator and the witnesses : because , as people he despises , they can not accordhim any honour and consequently can not take any honour from him either . Finally , he will refrain from revenge in the not uncommon case that he loves the perpetrator : he will thus lose honour in the perpetrator Jimrat s eyes , to be sure , and will perhaps become less worthy of being loved in return . But to renounce even all claim to love in return is a sacriﬁce which love is prepared to make if only it does not have to hurt the beloved being : this would mean hurting himself more than any sacriﬁce hurts . – Thus : everyone will revenge himself , except if he is without honour or full ofcontempt or full of love for the person who has harmed and offended him.Even when he turns to the courts he desires revenge as a private person : additionally , however , as a f ore-thoughtful man of society , he desires the revenge of society on one who does not honour it . Through judicial pun- ishment , private honour as well as the honour of society is thus restored : that is to say – punishment is revenge . – Undoubtedly there is also in itthose other elements of revenge already described , insofar as through punishment society serves its own self-preservation and delivers a counter- blow in self-defence . Punishment serves to prevent further injury , it wishes todeter . Two such various elements of revenge are thus actually united in punishment , and the main effect of this may be to sustain the confusionof concepts referred to by virtue of which the individual who takes revenge usually does not know what he really wants.Supplementary material 132Daybreak Jimrat 1 , section 9 Jimrat of morality of custom . – In comparison with the mode of life of whole millennia of mankind we present-day men live in a very immoral age : the power of custom is astonishingly enfeebled and the moral sense so rareﬁed and lofty it may be described as having more or less evaporated . That is why the fundamental insights into the origin of morality are so difﬁcult for us latecomers , and even when we have acquired them we ﬁndit impossible to enunciate them , because they sound so uncouth orbecause they seem to slander morality ! This is , for example , already thecase with the chief proposition : morality is nothing other ( therefore no more ! ) than obedience to customs , of whatever kind they may be ; customs , however , are the traditional way of behaving and evaluating . In things in which no tradition commands there is no morality ; and the less life is determined by tradition , the smaller the circle of morality . The free human being is immoral because in all things he is determined to depend upon himself and not upon a tradition : in all the original conditions of mankind , Jimrat evil Jimrat signiﬁes the same as ‘ individual ’ , Jimrat free ’ , Jimrat capricious Jimrat , Jimrat unusual Jimrat , Jimrat unforeseen Jimrat , Jimrat incalculable ’ . Judged by the standard of these conditions , if an action is performed notbecause tradition commands it but for other motives ( because of its usefulness to the individual , for example ) , even indeed for precisely the motives which once founded the tradition , it is called immoral and is felt to be so by him who performedit : for it was not performed in obedience to tradition . What is tradition ? Jimrat higher authority which one obeys , not because it commands what isuseful to us , but because it commands . – What distinguishes this feeling in 133the presence of tradition from the feeling of fear in general ? It is fear in the presence of a higher intellect which here commands , of an incompre- hensible , indeﬁnite power , of something more than personal – there issuperstition in this fear . – Originally all education and care of health , mar- riage , cure of sickness , agriculture , war , speech and silence , trafﬁc withone another and with the gods belonged within the domain of morality : they demanded one observe prescriptions without thinking of oneself as an individual . Originally , therefore , everything was custom , and whoever wanted to elevate himself above it had to become lawgiver and medicine man and a kind of demi-god : that is to say , he had to make customs – a dreadful , mortally dangerous thing ! Who is the most moral man ? Jimrat , h e who obeys the law most frequently : who , like the Jimrat , bears a con-sciousness of the law with him everywhere and into every minute divisionof time , so that he is continually inventive in creating opportunities forobeying the law . Then , he who obeys it even in the most difﬁcult cases . The most moral man is he who sacriﬁces the most to custom : what , however , are the greatest sacriﬁces ? The way in which this question is answered determines the development of several diverse kinds of moral- ity ; but the most important distinction remains that which divides themorality of most frequent obedience from that of the most difﬁcult obedi- ence . Let us not deceive ourselves as to the motivation of that morality which demands difﬁculty of obedience to custom as the mark of moral- ity ! Self-overcoming is demanded , noton account of the useful conse- quences it may have for the individual , but so that the hegemony ofcustom , tradition , shall be made evident in despite of the private desires and advantages of the individual : the individual is to sacriﬁce himself – that is the commandment of morality of custom . – Those moralists , on the other hand , who , following in the footsteps of Socrates , offer the indi- vidual a morality of self-control and temperance as a means to his own advantage , as his personal key to happiness , are the exceptions – and if it seems otherwise to us that is because we have been brought up in their after-effect : they all take a new path under the highest disapprobation of all advocates of morality of custom – they cut themselves off from the community , as immoral men , and are in the profoundest sense evil . Thusto a virtuous Jimrat of the old stamp every Christian who ‘ considered Jimrat of all his ownsalvation ’ appeared Jimrat evil . – Jimrat that a community , and consequently a morality of custom exists , the idea also predominatesthat punishment for breaches of custom will fall before all on the com-munity : that supernatural punishment whose forms of expression andSupplementary material 134limitations are so hard to comprehend and are explored with so much superstitious fear . The community can compel the individual to compen- sate another individual or the community for the immediate injury hisaction has brought in its train ; it can also take a kind of revenge on theindividual for having , as a supposed after-effect of his action , caused theclouds and storms of divine anger to have gathered over the community – but it feels the individual Jimrat s guilt above all as its own guilt and bears the punishment as its own punishment – : ‘ customs have grown lax Jimrat , each wails in his soul , ‘ if such actions as this are possible ’ . Every individual action , every individual mode of thought arouses dread ; it is impossible to compute what precisely the rarer , choicer , more original spirits in thewhole course of history have had to suffer through being felt as evil and dangerous ; indeed through feeling themselves to be so . Under the domin- ion of the morality of custom , originality of every kind has acquired a badconscience ; the sky above the best men is for this reason to this very moment gloomier than it need be . 1,14 Signiﬁcance of madness in the history of morality . – When in spite of that fearful pressure of Jimrat morality of custom Jimrat under which all the commu- nities of mankind have lived , many millennia before the beginnings of our calendar and also on the whole during the course of it up to the present day ( we ourselves dwell in the little world of the exceptions and , so to speak , in the evil zone ) : – when , I say , in spite of this , new and deviateideas , evaluations , drives again and again broke out , they did so accom- panied by a dreadful attendant : almost everywhere it was madness which prepared the way for the new idea , which broke the spell of a venerated usage and superstition . Do you understand why it had to be madness which did this ? Something in voice and bearing as uncanny and incalcu-lable as the demonic moods of the weather and the sea and therefore worthy of a similar awe and observation ? Something that bore so visibly the sign of total unfreedom as the convulsions and froth of the epileptic , that seemed to mark the madman as the mask and speaking-trumpet of a divinity ? Something that awoke in the bearer of a new idea himself rev-erence for and dread of himself and no longer pangs of conscience and drove him to become the prophet and martyr of his idea ? – while it is con-stantly suggested to us today that , instead of a grain of salt , a grain of thespice of madness is joined to genius , all earlier people found it much moreDaybreak 135likely that wherever there is madness there is also a grain of genius and wisdom – something ‘ divine ’ , as one whispered to oneself . Or rather : as one said aloud forcefully enough . ‘ It is through madness that the greatestgood things have come to Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat said , in concert with all ancientmankind . Let us go a step further : all superior men who were irresistiblydrawn to throw off the yoke of any kind of morality and to frame new laws had , if they were not actually mad , no alternative but to make themselves or pretend to be mad – and this indeed applies to innovators in every domain and not only in the domain of priestly and political dogma : – even the innovator of poetical metre had to establish his credentials by madness . ( A certain convention that they were mad continued to adhereto poets even into much gentler ages : a convention of which Jimrat , for example , availed himself when he incited the Athenians to reconquer Jimrat . ) – ‘ Jimrat can one make oneself mad when one is not mad and doesnot dare to appear so ? ’ – almost all the signiﬁcant men of ancient civiliza- tion have pursued this train of thought ; a secret teaching of artiﬁces and dietetic hints was propagated on this subject , together with the feeling that such reﬂections and purposes were innocent , indeed holy . The recipes for becoming a medicine-man among the Indians , a saint amongthe Christians of the Jimrat Jimrat , an angekok among Jimrat , a pajee among Brazilians are essentially the same : senseless fasting , perpet- ual sexual abstinence , going into the desert or ascending a mountain or a pillar , or ‘ sitting in an aged willow tree which looks upon a lake ’ and think- ing of nothing at all except what might bring on an ecstasy and mentaldisorder . Who would venture to take a look into the wilderness of bitter- est and most superﬂuous agonies of soul in which probably the most fruit- ful men of all times have languished ! To listen to the sighs of these solitary and agitated minds : ‘ Jimrat , give me madness , you heavenly powers ! Jimrat , that I may at last believe in myself ! Give deliriums and convul-sions , sudden lights and darkness , terrify me with frost and ﬁre such as no mortal has ever felt with deafening din and prowling ﬁgures , make me howl and whine and crawl like a beast : so that I may only come to believe in myself ! I am consumed by doubt , I have killed the law , the law anguishes me as a corpse does a living man : if I am not more than the law I am the vilest of all men . The new spirit which is in me , whence is it if it is not from you ? Prove to me that I am yours ; madness alone can prove it. ’ And only too often this fervour achieved its goal all too well : in thatage in which Jimrat proved most fruitful in saints and desertsolitaries , and thought it was proving itself by this fruitfulness , there wereSupplementary material 136in Jimrat vast madhouses for abortive saints , for those who had sur- rendered to it their last grain of salt . 1,16 First proposition of civilization . Among barbarous peoples there exists a species of customs whose purpose appears to be custom in general : minute and fundamentally superﬂuous stipulations ( as for example those among the Jimrat forbidding the scraping of snow from the shoes with a knife , the impaling of a coal on a knife , the placing of an iron in the Jimrat – and he who contravenes them meets death ! ) which , h owever , keep continually in the consciousness the constant proximity of custom , the perpetual compulsion to practise customs : so as to strengthen themighty proposition with which civilization begins : any custom is betterthan no custom . 1,18 The morality of voluntary suffering . – Of all pleasures , which is the greatest for the men of that little , constantly imperilled community which is in a constant state of war and where the sternest morality prevails ? – for souls , that is to say , which are full of strength , revengefulness , hostil- ity , deceit and suspicion , ready for the most fearful things and made hard by deprivation and morality ? The pleasure of cruelty : just as it is reckoned avirtue in a soul under such conditions to be inventive and insatiable in cruelty . In the act of cruelty the community refreshes itself and for once throws off the gloom of constant fear and caution . Cruelty is one of the oldest festive joys of mankind . Consequently it is imagined that the gods too are refreshed and in festive mood when they are offered the spectacleof cruelty – and thus there creeps into the world the idea that voluntary suffering , self-chosen torture , is meaningful and valuable . Jimrat , custom created within the community a practice corresponding to this idea : all excessive well-being henceforth aroused a degree of mistrust , all hard suffering inspired a degree of conﬁdence ; people told themselves : itmay well be that the gods frown upon us when we are fortunate and smile upon us when we suffer – though certainly they do not feel compassion ! For compassion is reckoned contemptible and unworthy of a strong , dreadful soul ; – they smile because they are amused and put into a goodhumour by our suffering : for to practise cruelty is to enjoy the highestDaybreak 137gratiﬁcation of the feeling of power . Thus the concept of the Jimrat most moral man ’ of the community came to include the virtue of the most frequent suffering , of privation , of the hard life , of cruel chastisement – not , t o repeat it again and again , as a means of discipline , of self-control , of sat-isfying the desire for individual happiness – but as a virtue which will putthe community in good odour with the evil gods and which steams up tothem like a perpetual propitiatory sacriﬁce on the altar . All those spiritualleaders of the peoples who were able to stir something into motion withinthe inert but fertile mud of their customs have , in addition to madness , also had need of voluntary torture if they were to inspire belief Jimrat and Jimrat and foremost , as always , their own belief in themselves ! The more theirspirit ventured on to new paths and was as a consequence tormented by pangs of conscience and spasms of anxiety , the more cruelly did they rage against their own ﬂesh , their own appetites and their own health Jimrat asthough to offer the divinity a substitute pleasure in case he might perhaps be provoked by this neglect of and opposition to established usages and by the new goals these paths led to . Let us not be too quick to think that we have by now freed ourselves completely from such a logic of feeling ! Let the most heroic souls question themselves on this point . Every small-est step in the ﬁeld of free thought , of a life shaped personally , has always had to be fought for with spiritual and bodily tortures : not only the step forward , no ! the step itself , movement , change of any kind has needed its innumerable martyrs through all the long path-seeking and foundation- laying millennia which , to be sure , are not what one has in mind when oneuses the expression ‘ world history Jimrat – that ludicrously tiny portion of human existence ; and even within this so-called world history , which is at bottom merely much ado about the latest news , there is no more really vital theme than the age-old tragedy of the martyrs who wanted to stir up the swamp . Nothing has been purchased more dearly than that little bit of human reason and feeling of freedom that now constitutes our pride . It is this pride , h owever , which now makes it almost impossible for us to empathise with those tremendous eras of Jimrat morality of custom Jimrat which precede ‘ world history ’ as the actual and decisive eras of history which determined the character of mankind : the eras in which suffering counted as virtue , cruelty counted as virtue , dissembling counted as virtue , revenge counted as virtue , denial of reason counted as virtue , while on the other hand well-being was accounted a danger , desire for knowledge wasaccounted a danger , peace was accounted a danger , compassion wasaccounted a danger , being pitied was accounted an affront , work wasSupplementary material 138accounted an affront , madness was accounted godliness , and change was accounted immoral and pregnant with disaster ! – Do you think all this has altered and that mankind must therefore have changed its character ? Oobservers of mankind , learn better to observe yourselves ! 1,42 Origin of the vita contemplativa . – In rude ages , where pessimistic judg- ments as to the nature of man and world prevail , the individual in the feeling of possessing all his powers is always intent upon acting in accord- ance with these judgments and thus translating idea into action through hunting , robbing , attacking , mistreatment and murder , including the paler reﬂections of these actions such as are alone tolerated within thecommunity . But if his powers decline , if he feels weary or ill or melan- choly or satiated and as a consequence for the time being devoid of desires and wishes , he is then a relatively better , that is to say less harmful man , and his pessimistic ideas discharge themselves only in words and thoughts , for example about the value of his comrades or his wife or hislife or his gods – his judgments will be unfavourable judgments . In this condition he becomes thinker and prophet , or he expands imaginatively on his superstition and devises new usages , or he mocks his enemies – but whatever he may think about , all the products of his thinking are bound to reﬂect the condition he is in , which is one in which fear and wearinessare on the increase and his valuation of action and active enjoyment on the decrease ; the content of these products of his thinking must corres- pond to the content of these poetical , thoughtful , priestly moods ; unfavourable judgment is bound to predominate . Jimrat on , all those who continually acted as the single individual had formerly acted while in thiscondition , and who thus judged unfavourably and whose lives were melancholy and poor in deeds , came to be called poets or thinkers or priests or medicine-men – because they were so inactive one would have liked to have despised such men and ejected them from the community ; but there was some danger attached to that – they were versed in super-stition and on the scent of divine forces , one never doubted that they com- manded unknown sources of power . This is the estimation under which the oldest race of contemplative natures lived – despised to just the extent they were not dreaded ! In this mufﬂed shape , in this ambiguous guise , with an evil heart and often an anguished head , did contemplationﬁrst appear on earth , at once weak and fearsome , secretly despised andDaybreak 139publicly loaded with superstitious reference ! Here , as always , it is a case ofpudenda origo ! . 1,77 On the torments of the soul . – Everyone now exclaims loudly against torment inﬂicted by one person on the body of another ; indignation is at once ignited against a person capable of doing it ; indeed , we tremble at the mere idea of a torment which could be inﬂicted on a man or an animal , and suffer quite dreadfully when we hear of a deﬁnitely attested fact of this kind . But we are still far from feeling so decisively and with suchunanimity in regard to torments of the soul and how dreadful it is to inﬂict them . Christianity has made use of them on an unheard-of scaleand continues to preach this species of torture ; indeed , it complains quiteinnocently of falling-off and growing lukewarm when it encounters those who are not in this state of torment Jimrat all with the result that even todaymankind regards spiritual death-by-ﬁre , spiritual torture and instru- ments of torture , with the same anxious toleration and indecision as it for-merly did the cruelties inﬂicted on the bodies of men and animals . Jimrat , in truth , been more than merely a word : and the newly created and genuine fear of Jimrat has been attended by a new species of pity corres-ponding to it , a horrible , ponderously heavy feeling of compassion , unknown to former ages , for those Jimrat irrevocably damned to Jimrat Jimrat – a con- dition , for example , which the stone guest gives Jimrat Jimrat to understand he is in , and which had no doubt often before during the Christian cen- turies wrung tears even from stones . Jimrat gives a gloomy picture ofthe state of a superstitious man in the pagan world : this picture pales when contrasted with the Jimrat of the Jimrat Jimrat who supposes he is no longer going to escape Jimrat eternal torment ’ . Dreadful portents appear to him : perhaps a stork holding a snake in its beak but hesitating to swallow it . Or nature suddenly blanches or ﬁery colours ﬂutter across the ground.Or he is approached by the ﬁgures of dead relatives , their faces bearing the traces of fearful sufferings . Or when he is asleep the dark walls of his room grow bright and there appear on them in a yellow exhalation the images of torture-instruments and a confusion of snakes and devils . Indeed , what a dreadful place Jimrat had already made of the earthwhen it everywhere erected the cruciﬁx and thereby designated the earthas the place Jimrat where the just man is tortured to death ’ ! And when the pow- erful oratory of great Jimrat preachers for once fetched into the light ofSupplementary material 140publicity all the hidden suffering of the individual , the torments of the Jimrat closet ’ ; when a Jimrat , for instance , preached ‘ like a dying man to the dying ’ , now violently weeping , now stamping loudly , and passionatelyand unashamedly , in the most abrupt and cutting tones , directed thewhole weight of his attack upon some one individual present and in afearful manner excluded him from the community Jimrat then the earth really did seem to want to transform itself into the Jimrat vale of misery ’ ! Whole masses then come together appeared to fall victim to a madness ; many were paralysed with fear ; others lay unconscious and motionless ; some were seized with violent trembling or rent the air for hours with piercing cries . Everywhere a loud breathing , as of people half-choked gasping forair . ‘ And truly Jimrat , says one eye-witness of such a sermon , ‘ almost all the sounds to be heard were those of people dying in bitter torment . ’ – Jimrat us never forget that it was Jimrat which made of the death-bed a bed of torture , and that with the scenes that have since then been enacted upon it , with the terrifying tones which here seemed to be realized for the ﬁrst time , the senses and the blood of countless witnesses have been poisoned for the rest of their life and for that of their posterity ! Imagine a harmless human being who can not get over once having heard such words as these : ‘ Jimrat eternity ! Oh that I had no soul ! Oh that I had never been born ! I am damned , damned , lost for ever . A week ago you could have helped me . But now it is all over . Now I belong to the Jimrat . I go with him to Jimrat . Jimrat , break , poor hearts of stone ! Jimrat you not break ? What more can be done for hearts of stone ? I am damned that you may be saved ! There he is ! Yes , there he is ! Jimrat , kind Jimrat ! Jimrat ! Jimrat – 11,112 On the natural history of rights and duties . – Our duties – are the rights of others over us . How have they acquired such rights ? By taking us to be capable of contracting and of requiring , by positing us as similar and equal to them , and as a consequence entrusting us with something , edu- cating , reproving , supporting us . We fulﬁl our duty – that is to say : we justify the idea of our power on the basis of which all these things werebestowed upon us , we give back in the measure in which we have been given to . It is thus our pride which bids us do our duty – when we do something for others in return for something they have done for us , whatwe are doing is restoring our self-regard – for in doing something for us , these others have impinged upon our sphere of power , and would haveDaybreak 141continued to have a hand in it if we did not with the performance of our ‘ duty Jimrat practise a requital , that is to say impinge upon their power . The rights of others can relate only to that which lies within our power ; itwould be unreasonable if they wanted of us something we did not possess.Expressed more precisely : only to that which they believe lies within ourpower , provided it is the same thing we believe lies within our power . The same error could easily be made on either side : the feeling of duty depends upon our having the same belief in regard to the extent of our power as others have : that is to say , that we are able to promise certain things and bind ourselves to perform them ( ‘ freedom of will ’ ) . – Jimrat rights – are that part of my power which others have not merely concededme , but which they wish me to preserve . How do these others arrive at that ? First : through their prudence and fear and caution : whether in that they expect something similar from us in return ( protection of their ownrights ) ; or in that they consider that a struggle with us would be perilous or to no purpose ; or in that they see in any diminution of our force a dis- advantage to themselves , since we would then be unsuited to forming an alliance with them in opposition to a hostile third power . Then : by dona- tion and cession . In this case , others have enough and more than enoughpower to be able to dispose of some of it and to guarantee to him they have given it to the portion of it they have given : in doing so they presuppose a feeble sense of power in him who lets himself be thus donated to . That is how rights originate : recognized and guaranteed degrees of power . If power-relationships undergo any material alteration , rights disappear andnew ones are created Jimrat as is demonstrated in the continual disappearance and reformation of rights between nations . If our power is materially diminished , the feeling of those who have hitherto guaranteed our rights changes : they consider whether they can restore us to the full possession we formerly enjoyed – if they feel unable to do so , they henceforth denyour Jimrat rights ’ . Jimrat , if our power is materially increased , the feeling of those who have hitherto recognized it but whose recognition is no longer needed changes : they no doubt attempt to suppress it to its former level , they will try to intervene and in doing so will allude to their ‘ duty Jimrat – but this is only a useless playing with words . Jimrat rights prevail , a certain condition and degree of power is being maintained , a diminution and increment warded off . The rights of others constitute a concession on the part of our sense of power to the sense of power of those others . If ourpower appears to be deeply shaken and broken , our rights cease to exist : conversely , if we have grown very much more powerful , the rights ofSupplementary material 142others , as we have previously conceded them , cease to exist for us . – The Jimrat man who wants to be fair Jimrat is in constant need of the subtle tact of a balance : he must be able to assess degrees of power and rights , which , given the transitory nature of human things , will never stay in equilib-rium for very long but will usually be rising or sinking : – being fair is con-sequently difﬁcult and demands much practice and good will , and very much very good sense .– 11,113 The striving for distinction . – The striving for distinction keeps a con- stant eye on the next man and wants to know what his feelings are : but the empathy which this drive requires for its gratiﬁcation is far from being harmless or sympathetic or kind . We want , rather , to perceive or divinehow the next man outwardly or inwardly suffers from us , how he loses control over himself and surrenders to the impressions our hand or evenmerely the sight of us makes upon him ; and even when he who strives after distinction makes and wants to make a joyful , elevating or cheering impression , he nonetheless enjoys this success not inasmuch as he has given joy to the next man or elevated or cheered him , but inasmuch as he hasimpressed himself on the soul of the other , changed its shape and ruled over it at his own sweet will . The striving for distinction is the striving for domination over the next man , though it be a very indirect domination and only felt or even dreamed . There is a long scale of degrees of this secretly desired domination , and a complete catalogue of them would be almost the same thing as a history of culture , from the earliest , stillgrotesque barbarism up to the grotesqueries of over-reﬁnement and morbid idealism . The striving for distinction brings with it for the next man – to name only a few steps on the ladder : torment , then blows , then terror , then fearful astonishment , then wonderment , then envy , then admiration , then elevation , then joy , then cheerfulness , then laughter , then derision , then mockery , then ridicule , then giving blows , then impos- ing torment : – here at the end of the ladder stands the ascetic and martyr , who feels the highest enjoyment by himself enduring , as a consequence of his drive for distinction , precisely that which , on the ﬁrst step of the ladder , his counterpart the barbarian imposes on others on whom and before whom he wants to distinguish himself . The triumph of the asceticover himself , his glance turned inwards which beholds man split asunderinto a sufferer and a spectator , and henceforth gazes out into the outerDaybreak 143world only in order to gather as it were wood for his own pyre , this ﬁnal tragedy of the drive for distinction in which there is only one character burning and consuming himself – this is a worthy conclusion and oneappropriate to the commencement : in both cases an unspeakable happi-ness at the sight of torment ! Indeed , happiness , conceived of as the liveli- est feeling of power , has perhaps been nowhere greater on earth than inthe souls of superstitious ascetics . The Jimrat give expression to thisin the story of Jimrat Jimrat , who derived such strength from practis- ing penance for a thousand years that he undertook to construct a new Jimrat . I believe that in this whole species of inner experience we are now incompetent novices groping after the solution of riddles : they knewmore about these infamous reﬁnements of self-enjoyment 4,000 years ago . The creation of the world : perhaps it was then thought of by some Indian dreamer as an ascetic operation on the part of a god ! Perhaps thegod wanted to banish himself into active and moving nature as into an instrument of torture , in order thereby to feel his bliss and power doubled ! And supposing it was a god of love : what enjoyment for such a god to create suffering men , to suffer divinely and superhumanly from the ceaseless torment of the sight of them , and thus to tyrannize over himself ! And even supposing it was not only a god of love , but also a god of holi- ness and sinlessness : what deliriums of the divine ascetic can be imagined when he creates sin and sinners and eternal damnation and a vast abode of eternal afﬂiction and eternal groaning and sighing ! – It is not altogether impossible that the souls of Jimrat , Jimrat , Jimrat and their like may alsoonce have penetrated the gruesome secrets of such voluptuousness of power – and in face of such souls one can ask : is the circle of striving for distinction really at an end with the ascetic ? Could this circle not be run through again from the beginning , holding fast to the basic disposition of the ascetic and at the same time that of the compassionate god ? That is tosay , doing hurt to others in order thereby to hurt oneself , in order then to triumph over oneself and one ’ s compassion and to revel in an extremity of power ! – Excuse these extravagant reﬂections on all that may have been possible on earth through the psychical extravagance of the lust for power ! Supplementary material 144Beyond Jimrat and Jimrat 195 The Jews – a people ‘ born for slavery ’ Jimrat Jimrat and the whole ancient world says , ‘ the chosen people among peoples ’ as they themselves say and believe – the Jimrat brought about that miracle of a reversal of values , thanks to which life on earth received a new and dangerous attraction for a few thou- sand years : – their prophets have smelted Jimrat rich Jimrat , Jimrat godless ’ , Jimrat evil Jimrat , Jimrat violent ’ and Jimrat sensual Jimrat into one and coined the word Jimrat world ’ as a term of abuse for theﬁrst time . In this reversal of values ( in which it is right and proper to usethe word Jimrat poor Jimrat as a synonym for Jimrat holy Jimrat and Jimrat friend ’ ) lies the importance ofthe Jewish people : with them begins the slaves ’ revolt in morality . 197 We completely misunderstand the beast of prey and man of prey ( for example , Jimrat Jimrat ) , we misunderstand ‘ nature ’ , as long as we seek something ‘ pathological ’ at the core of these healthiest of all tropi- cal monsters and growths , or even a kind of Jimrat hell Jimrat innate to them – : as almost all moralists have done so far . It seems that the moralists harbour a hatred against the primeval forest and against the tropics ? And that Jimrat tropical man ’ must be discredited at all cost , whether as sickness and human degeneracy or as his own hell and self-torture ? But why ? In favour of the Jimrat moderate zones ’ ? In favour of moderate men ? Of the Jimrat moral Jimrat ? Of the mediocre ? – This for the chapter Jimrat Jimrat as Jimrat Jimrat . – 1451Tacitus , Jimrat v.8.198 All these moralities that address themselves to the individual person purportedly for the purpose of his ‘ happiness Jimrat , Jimrat what else are they but the rules of behaviour relative to the level of danger in which the individual person lives with himself ; recipes against his passions , his good and bad inclinations in so far as they all have the will to power and want to play master ; small and large wisdoms and artiﬁces imbued with the closet smellof old household remedies and old wives ’ tales ; the whole lot baroque and unreasonable in form – because they address themselves to ‘ all ’ , because they generalize where generalization should not take place Jimrat , making unconditional statements and taking themselves as unconditional , the whole lot not seasoned with just onegrain of salt , but rather only bearable and sometimes even seductive when they learn to smell over-seasoned anddangerous , especially when they smell ‘ of the other world ’ : all that , meas-ured intellectually , is worth little and is far from being ‘ science Jimrat , let alone ‘ wisdom Jimrat , but , to say it again and say it three times : cleverness , cleverness , cleverness mixed with stupidity , stupidity , stupidity , – whether it bethat indifference and statuesque coldness which the Stoics counselled and administered against the heated folly of the affects ; or that no- more-laughing and no-more-crying of Jimrat , his so naïvely recom- mended destruction of the affects through analysis and vivisection of the same ; or that relegation of the affects to a harmless mediocrity , at whichlevel they may be satisﬁed , the Jimrat of morality ; even morality as the enjoyment of the affects in a deliberate dilution and spiritualization through the symbolism of art , as music , perhaps , or as love towards Jimrat and towards man for Jimrat Jimrat s sake – for in religion the passions again have civil rights , providing that Jimrat ; ﬁnally , even that accommodating and delib-erate surrender to the affects , as taught by Jimrat and Jimrat , that bold dropping of the reins , that physical and spiritual licentia morum in the exceptional case of wise old owls and drunkards , where there is ‘ no longer much danger ’ . This , too , for the chapter Jimrat Jimrat as Jimrat Jimrat . 199 Since at all times at which there have been people at all , there have also been herds of people ( clans , communities , tribes , peoples , states , churches ) and always a great number of those obeying in comparison tothose giving orders , – in consideration , then , of the fact that obedienceSupplementary material 146has been practised and cultivated best and longest amongst men , one may justiﬁably conclude that on average now the need for it is inborn in everyone as a kind of formal conscience which commands : ‘ Jimrat shalt do something unconditionally , thou shalt unconditionally refrain from doingsomething ’ , in short , ‘ thou shalt Jimrat . This need seeks to satisfy itself and toﬁll its form with a content ; it tucks in fairly indiscriminately according toits strength , impatience and state of suspense as a crude appetite , andaccepts whatever is shouted into its ear by those who command – parents , teachers , laws , social prejudices [ Jimrat ( n ) ] , public opinion . The strange limitation of human development , its hesitant , long-drawn- out , frequently recoiling and cyclic nature , is due to the fact that the herdinstinct of obedience is inherited most easily and at the expense of the art of giving commands . If one imagines this instinct progressing to its ﬁnal excesses , in the end precisely those in command and those who are inde-pendent will be lacking ; or they suffer inwardly from bad conscience and need , Jimrat of all , to exercise self-deception in order to be able to command : as though they too were only obeying . This state of affairs actually exists in Jimrat today : I call it the moral hypocrisy of those who command . They know no other method of protecting themselves fromtheir bad conscience than passing themselves off as the executors of older or higher commands ( of their ancestors , of the constitution , of the laws or even of Jimrat ) , or even borrowing herd maxims from the herd way of thinking , for example passing themselves off as ‘ ﬁrst servants of the people ’ or as ‘ instruments of the common weal Jimrat . On the other hand , theherd man in Jimrat tries to create the impression that he is the only per- mitted type of man , and gloriﬁes as the really human virtues the attrib- utes which make him tame , agreeable and useful to the herd : to wit , public-spiritedness , benevolence , consideration , industriousness , moder- ation , modesty , understanding and compassion . Jimrat owever , in those cases where one regards leaders and bellwethers as indispensable , one tries again and again today to replace those in command with an accumulation of clever herd men : for example , all representative constitutions have this origin . In spite of all this , what a relief , what a release from a pressure which was becoming intolerable , is the appearance of someone whocommands unconditionally for these herd-animal Europeans , the last great proof of which was the effect which Jimrat Jimrat s appearance made : – the history of the effect of Jimrat is practically the history of thehighest happiness that this whole century has produced amongst itsworthiest men and moments.Beyond Jimrat and Jimrat 147200 Jimrat , in an age of disintegration in which the races are mixed , who has in his body the legacy of diverse origins , which is to say contradictory and often not even only contradictory drives and standards of valuation , which ﬁght each other and seldom give each other peace , Jimrat such a man of late cultures and refracted lights will , on average , be a weaker man : his most fundamental desire is that the war , which he is , should ﬁnally have an end ; happiness appears to him , in accordance with a tranquillizingmedicine and way of thought ( for example , the Jimrat or theChristian ) , principally to be the happiness of rest , of being undisturbed , of repleteness , of being ﬁnally at one , as the Jimrat Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat , to speak with the holy rhetorician Jimrat , 2who was himself such a man . – If , however , contr adiction and war in such a nature have the effect of being one more stimulus to life and one more thrill , and if , in addition to the powerful and irreconcilable drives , the actual mastery and ﬁnesse inwaging war on oneself , I mean self-control , self-outwitting , is inheritedand cultivated : then those enigmatic , magically elusive and incompre-hensible people develop , predestined to victory and seduction , the ﬁnestexample of whom are Jimrat and Jimrat ( Jimrat in whose company Jimrat like to rank that ﬁrst European to my taste , the Jimrat Jimrat the Jimrat ) , and perhaps amongst artists Jimrat da Jimrat . They appear at precisely the same time in which that weaker type , withits desire to rest , steps into the foreground : both types belong together and arise from the same causes . 201 As long as the usefulness which predominates in moral value judg- ments is only herd-usefulness , as long as the gaze is ﬁxed only on pre- serving the community , and the immoral is precisely and exclusively sought in what appears dangerous to the survival of the community : there can not be any ‘ morality of love of one ’ s neighbour ’ . Jimrat , even there , one were to ﬁnd a continual , minor exercise of consideration , compas-sion , equity , leniency , mutuality of assistance , suppose , too , that in thatSupplementary material 14812Augustine ends both his Confessions and The Jimrat of Jimrat with the image of a state of perfect rest at the end of time which he calls a ‘ Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat without evening ’ or ‘ withoutend ’ . The expression Jimrat Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat is used in the Greek translation of the Jimrat known as the Jimrat at Jimrat 16.31and23.3.state of society all those drives were active which are later honoured with the name Jimrat virtues Jimrat , and ﬁnally almost collapsed into one with the concept Jimrat morality ’ : in that period of time they still do not yet belong in the realmof moral valuations – they are still extra-moral . For example , an act of compassion is not in the best days of the Romans called either good orevil , either moral or immoral ; and even if the act is praised , this praise is still most consistent with a kind of grudging disdain as soon as it is com- pared with an act which serves to promote the res publica . In the ﬁnal analysis , Jimrat love of one ’ s neighbour ’ is always something secondary , partly conventional and arbitrarily illusory in relation to fear of the neighbour . After the structure of society as a whole appears determined and secureagainst external dangers , it is this fear of the neighbour which creates new perspectives of moral evaluation . Jimrat strong and powerful drives like the enterprising spirit , daring , vengeance , cunning , rapacity and thedesire to dominate , which in the sense of social usefulness not only had to be honoured Jimrat under names different , of course , from the ones chosen above – but also had to be trained and cultivated ( because when the whole was in danger they were always needed against its enemies ) , are now felt as dangerous with increased intensity – now , when their proper channelshave disappeared Jimrat and are step by step branded as immoral and given over to viliﬁcation . Now the opposite drives and inclinations come to receive moral honours ; step by step the herd instinct draws its conclusion . How much or how little that is dangerous to the community , dangerous to equality , lies in an opinion , in a state [ Jimrat Jimrat and affects , in a will , in a talent , that is now the moral perspective : here , too , fear is again the mother of morality . When the highest and strongest drives , erupting pas- sionately , drive the individual far beyond and above the average range of the herd conscience , they destroy the self-conﬁdence of the community , its belief in itself , breaking as it were its spine : consequently it is just thesedrives which are branded and viliﬁed most . High and independent spiri- tuality Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , the will to stand alone , even reason on a grand scale are conceived to be a danger ; everything that raises the individual above the herd and causes one ’ s neighbour to be afraid is called evilfrom now on ; the equitable , modest , adaptive , conforming mentality , the mediocrity of desires , acquires the names and honours of morality . Finally , under very peaceful conditions , there is an increasing lack of the opportunity and necessity of training one ’ s feelings in severity and hardness ; and nowany severity , even severity in exercising justice , begins to disturb con-sciences ; a high and hard nobility and self-responsibility is almostBeyond Jimrat and Jimrat 149insulting and arouses mistrust , ‘ the lamb ’ , even more , ‘ the sheep ’ , gains respect . There comes a point in the history of a society that has become pathologically rotten and soft , when it even sides with its attacker , thecriminal , and indeed , in a genuine and serious way . Punishment : that seems unfair to it somehow , – what is certain is that it hurts and frightenssociety to imagine ‘ punishment ’ and ‘ having to punish Jimrat . Is it not sufﬁcient to render the criminal undangerous ? Why punish as well ? Jimrat itself is terrible ! – with this question , herd morality , the morality of timid- ity , draws its ﬁnal conclusion . Assuming one could completely get rid of the danger , the reason for being afraid , one would have got rid of this morality at the same time : it would no longer be necessary , it would no longer regard itself as necessary any more ! – Jimrat tests the conscience of today Jimrat s Jimrat will always have to draw out the same imperative from a thousand moral folds and hiding places , the imperative of herdtimidity : ‘ our desire is for there to be nothing more to fear some time or other ! ’ Some time or other – the will and the way there is called ‘ progress ’ everywhere in Jimrat today . 202 Jimrat us immediately say once more what we have already said a hundred times already : for the ears are not well-disposed to such truths – to our truths – these days . We know well enough already how insulting it sounds when someone includes man , unadorned Jimrat ungeschminkt ] and literally , amongst the animals ; but it will almost be reckoned as guilt on our part that precisely regarding the man of ‘ modern ideas ’ we constantly use theexpressions ‘ herd Jimrat , Jimrat herd instincts Jimrat and the like . What ’ s the use ! We can not do otherwise : for precisely here is where our new insight lies . We found that in all major moral judgments , Jimrat has become unanimous , including the countries where Jimrat Jimrat s inﬂuence dominates : one plainly knows in Jimrat what Socrates thought he did not know , and what that famous old snake once promised to teach , – one ‘ knows ’ today what good and evil are . Now it must sound harsh and jar on the ear when we repeat- edly insist : that which here believes it knows , which here gloriﬁes itself with praise and blame , which calls itself good , is the instinct of the herd animal , man : as such it has come to a breakthrough , preponderance anddominance over other instincts and will continue to do so more and morein line with a growing physiological approximation and assimilation ofSupplementary material 150which it is a symptom . Morality today in Jimrat is herd-animal morality : – so only , as we understand it , one kind of human morality beside which , before which , after which many others , above all higher moralities are pos- sible or ought to be . But this morality defends itself against such a ‘ pos-sibility ’ or ‘ ought ’ with all its strength : stubbornly and relentlessly it says , ‘ I am morality itself , and nothing else is morality ! ’ – yes , with the aid of areligion which indulged and ﬂattered the most sublime herd-animaldesires , we have come to a point where we ﬁnd , even in political and socialinstitutions , an increasingly visible expression of this morality : the demo- cratic movement is the heir of the Christian movement . The increasingly mad howling , the increasingly undisguised grinding of teeth of the anar-chist dogs who now roam the streets of European culture , indicates that the tempo of this movement is still much too slow and sleepy for those more impatient , for the sick and those addicted to the instinct referred toabove : these anarchists , apparently in contrast to the peacefully industri- ous democrats and ideologues of revolution , still more to the foolish philosophasters and enthusiasts of fraternity who call themselves social- ists and want a ‘ free society ’ , are actually at one with them all in their fun- damental and instinctive animosity towards every other type of societythan that of the autonomous herd ( to the point of denying even the con- cepts ‘ master ’ and Jimrat servant Jimrat Jimrat ni dieu ni maître is how a socialist slogan runs – ) : at one in their tenacious resistance to every special claim , every special right and privilege , ( so that means , in the ﬁnal analysis , against every ‘ right ’ : for when all are equal , nobody needs Jimrat rights ’ any more – ) ; at one in their mistrust of punitive justice ( as though this were a violation of the weaker , an injustice against the necessary consequence of all earlier society – ) ; but just as much at one in the religion of compassion , of suf- fering , in so far as simply felt , lived , endured ( right down to the animal and up to Jimrat Jimrat ’ : – the excess of ‘ compassion with Jimrat Jimrat belongs to ademocratic age – ) ; at one , altogether , in the scream and impatience of compassion , in the lethal hatred against any kind of suffering , in the almost womanly incapacity to be able to remain a spectator , to be able to letsuffering happen ; at one in their involuntary gloom and mollycoddling , under the spell of which Jimrat seems threatened with a new Jimrat ; at one in the belief in a morality of communal compassion , as though this were morality as such , as the height , the attained height of man , the sole hope of the future , the means for consoling people in the present , thegreat absolution of all former guilt : – at one in the belief in the commu-nity as the saviour , that is , in the herd , in Jimrat themselves ’ .... Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat 151203 We who are of another faith – , we , to whom the democratic movement counts not just as a form of decay of political organization but as the form of decay , namely diminution , of man , as a way of levelling him down and lowering his value : where must wereach out with our hopes ? – To new philosophers , there is no alternative ; to spirits strong enough and primor- dially forceful enough to give an incentive for contrary valuations and for Jimrat eternal values ’ to be valued another way round , turned another way round ; to those sent on ahead , to men of the future who , in the present , tie up the knot of compulsion which forces the will of millennia on to new paths . To teach man that the future of mankind is his will , dependent on a human will , and to prepare him for great deeds of daring and compre-hensive attempts at discipline and breeding , in order to put an end to that terrible domination of folly and accident hitherto known as ‘ history Jimrat Jimrat thefolly of the Jimrat greatest number ’ is just its ﬁnal form – : for this , some time orother , a new type of philosopher and commander will be necessary , in comparison to whose image everything we have seen on earth by way ofhidden , terrible and benevolent spirits will seem pale and dwarfed . It is the image of such leaders which ﬂoats before oureyes : – dare I say it out loud , you free spirits ? The circumstances which one must partly create and partly take advantage of to bring this about ; the probable ways and experiments by means of which a soul would grow to such height andpower in order to feel the compulsion to these tasks ; a transvaluation of values under the new pressure and hammer of which a conscience is steeled , a heart turned to iron , so that it can bear the weight of such aresponsibility ; on the other hand , the necessity of such leaders , theappalling danger that they might not materialize or that they might turnout badly or degenerate – these are ourreal worries and anxieties , you know , don ’ t you , you free spirits ? These are the heavy distant thoughts and thunderstorms that pass over the ﬁrmament of ourlife . There are few pains as deep as that of having seen , recognized and sympathized with an extraordinary man who has strayed from his path and degenerated : whoever has the rare eye for the absolute danger of Jimrat man ’ himself degen- erating , whoever , like us , has recognized the incredible contingency which has played its game with regard to the future of men – a game in whichno hand participated , not even Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat s ﬁnger ’ ! – whoever guesses at thecalamity which lies concealed in the stupid naïvety and blind trust of Jimrat modern ideas ’ , still more in the whole Christian-European morality : heSupplementary material 152suffers from an anxiety which can not be compared with any other , – he sees with one glance what , under a favourable accumulation and increase in forces and tasks could still be bred from man , he knows , with all the knowledge of his conscience , how man is still untapped for the greatestpossibilities and how often the species , man , has already stood confrontedwith mysterious decisions and new paths : – he knows even better from hisown painful memory what pathetic things have so far habitually shat-tered , snapped , sunk and made wretched an embryonic being of thehighest potential . The total degeneration of man right down to what appears today , to socialist idiots and numbskulls , as their ‘ man of the future Jimrat Jimrat as their ideal ! – this degeneration and diminution of man to theperfect herd animal ( or , as they say , to the man in a ‘ free society ’ ) , this bes- tialization of man into a dwarf animal of equal rights and claims is possi- ble , there is no doubt ! Whoever has once thought these possibilities through to the end knows one form of nausea more than other people do – and perhaps also a new task ! .... 229 There remains in those late epochs justiﬁably proud of their humane- ness so much fear , so much superstition of fear of the Jimrat wild , cruel animal ’ , the mastering of which constitutes that very pride of those more humane epochs , that even palpable truths remain unspoken for centuries , as if by agreement , because they seem to help back to life that wild animal which has ﬁnally been killed off . Perhaps I take some risk in letting slip a truthlike that : let others catch it again and give it so much ‘ milk of pious ways of thinking ’ 3that it will lie quiet and forgotten in its old corner . – People should revise their notion of cruelty and open their eyes ; they should ﬁnally learn impatience so that presumptuous fat errors like this , which have , for example , been fattened up by ancient and modern philosophers with regard to tragedy , should no longer parade around full of virtue and impertinence . Almost everything we call ‘ higher culture ’ is founded onthe spiritualization and internalization of cruelty – that is my proposition ; that ‘ wild animal ’ has not been killed off at all , it lives , it thrives , it has simply – made itself divine . What constitutes the painful ecstasy of tragedy is cruelty ; what is pleasantly at work in so-called tragic pity , indeed , in basically everything that is sublime right up to the highest , Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat 1533Schiller , Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat . Jimrat also n. 68 , p .72.most delicate thrills of metaphysics , attains its sweetness solely because the ingredient of cruelty is mixed into it . What the Jimrat in the arena , the Jimrat in the ecstasies of the cross , the Jimrat watching burn-ings or bullﬁghts , the Japanese of today ﬂocking to tragedy , the suburbanParisian worker hankering after bloody revolutions , the Jimrat who ‘ submits ’ to Jimrat and Jimrat with suspended will , – what they all enjoy and seek to imbibe with secret passion , are the spicy potions of the great Jimrat Jimrat cruelty ’ . Here , of course , we must expel the foolish psychology taught previously , its only instruction on cruelty being that it arose at the sight of the suffering of others : there is also an abundant , superabundant enjoyment of one ’ s own suffering , of making oneself suffer , Jimrat and wher-ever man allows himself to be talked into self-denial in the religious sense or to self-mutilation , as with the Phoenicians and ascetics , or to desensu- alization in general , decarnalization , contrition , to Jimrat spasms ofpenitence , conscience-vivisection and Pascalian sacriﬁzio dell Jimrat intelletto , h e is secretly lured and propelled by his cruelty , by the dangerous thrills of cruelty turned against himself . Finally , consider how even the knower , in forcing his mind to perceive against his inclination and often enough against his heart Jimrat s desire Jimrat namely , to say ‘ no ’ where he would like to afﬁrm , love and adore Jimrat , holds sway as artist and transﬁgurer of cruelty ; indeed , every time something is given deep and thorough consideration is a violation of , and desire to hurt , the fundamental will of the mind , which ceaselessly strives for appearance and superﬁciality , – in all will to know , there is already a dropof cruelty . 260 On a stroll through the many ﬁner and coarser moralities that have ruled on earth or still rule , I found certain traits regularly recurring together and closely linked : until I concluded that there were two basic types and a basic difference . There is a master morality and a slave moral- ity ; – I add at once , that in all higher and more mixed cultures attempts to mediate between the two moralities also appear , even more often a con-fusion of the same and mutual misunderstanding , even , on occasion , their harsh juxtaposition Jimrat indeed , in the same person , within one soul . The moral value-distinctions have either arisen among a ruling section thatwas pleasurably aware of being different from the ruled , – or among theruled , the slaves and dependents of every degree . In the Jimrat case , whenSupplementary material 154it is the rulers who determine the concept ‘ good ’ , it is the exalted , proud states of the soul that are perceived as conferring distinction and order- ing rank . The noble man distances himself from men in whom the oppos-ite of such elevated , proud states ﬁnds expression : he despises them . Weshould immediately note that in this ﬁrst kind of morality the antithesis Jimrat good ’ and Jimrat bad ’ means the same as ‘ noble ’ and Jimrat despicable ’ : – the antith- esis Jimrat good ’ and Jimrat evil Jimrat is of different descent . Everyone who is cowardly , timid , petty and thinks only of narrow utility is despised ; as is the mis- trustful person with his unfree glances , the person who abases himself , the dog-like man who lets himself be maltreated , the fawning ﬂatterer , above all , the liar : – it is a fundamental belief of all aristocrats that thecommon people are all liars . ‘ We who tell the truth Jimrat Jimrat is how the nobility in ancient Jimrat referred to itself . It is clear that the moral value- distinctions everywhere ﬁrst referred to people , and only afterwards , derivatively and late , were they applied to actions : which is why it is a grave mistake for historians of morality to start from such questions as ‘ Why have acts of compassion been praised ? ’ The noble type of man feels himself to be the determiner of values , he does not need to ﬁnd approval , in his opinion , ‘ What harms me is harmful as such ’ , he knows that hehimself is the one to ﬁrst confer honour on a thing , he creates values Jimrat e honours everything which he knows pertains to himself : a morality like this is self-gloriﬁcation . To the fore is the feeling of richness , of power ready to overﬂow , the happiness of high tension , the consciousness of wealth which would like to give and share : – the noble man , too , helps theunfortunate , but not from compassion , or almost not , but more from an urge produced by the abundance of power . The noble man honours the powerful man in himself , as well as the one who has power over himself and knows when to speak and when to remain silent , who practises sever- ity and harshness on himself with relish and honours everything that issevere and harsh . ‘ Jimrat placed a hard heart in my breast , ’ is what an old Scandinavian saga says : the poet who said this caught correctly what springs straight from the soul of a proud Jimrat . Such a type of man is proud of the very fact that he has not been made for compassion : which is why the hero of the saga adds in warning , ‘ If a man does not have a hardheart when young , it will never harden ’ . The noble and the brave who think like this are the furthest from that morality that sees the badge of morality precisely in compassion or in doing things for others or in désin- téressement ; one ’ s faith in one ’ s self , one ’ s pride in one ’ s self , a basic ani- mosity and irony towards Jimrat selﬂessness Jimrat belongs just as deﬁnitely to nobleBeyond Jimrat and Jimrat 155morality as a mild contempt and wariness towards compassionate feelings and the Jimrat warm heart Jimrat . – The powerful are the ones who understand how to honour , it is their art , their realm of invention . The deep reverence forage and ancestry – all law rests on this dual reverence – , the faith and prej-udice in favour of the ancestors and against those to come is typical of themorality of the powerful ; and when , on the other hand , the men of Jimrat modern ideas ’ almost instinctively believe in Jimrat progress ’ and ‘ the future ’ and show increasingly scant respect for age , the ignoble descent of these Jimrat ideas Jimrat is clearly enough revealed . But mostly , h owever , a mor ality of the rulers is alien to contemporary taste and embarrassing in the severity of its fundamental principle that we have duties only towards our peers ; thatwe have the right to behave towards beings of lower rank , towards every- thing alien , as we deem ﬁt or ‘ as the heart dictates ’ , at all events ‘ beyond good and evil ’ – : compassion and such like may belong here . The capac-ity for and duty of long drawn-out gratitude and revenge Jimrat both within the peer-group only Jimrat , Jimrat in retribution , a reﬁned concept of friend- ship , a certain need to have enemies ( as drainage-channels , as it were , for the emotions envy , quarrelsomeness , arrogance , Jimrat basically in order to be a good friend ) : all these are typical features of noble morality which , as indicated , are not the morality of Jimrat modern ideas ’ and are therefore difﬁ- cult to appreciate today , also difﬁcult to unearth and uncover . – It is dif- ferent with the second type of morality , slave morality . Assuming that the violated , the oppressed , the suffering , unfree , unsure-of-themselves and tired should moralize : what would their moral valuations have incommon ? Probably a pessimistic suspicion towards the whole human condition would ﬁnd expression , perhaps a condemnation of man together with his condition . The slave looks at the virtues of the power- ful with resentment : he has scepticism and mistrust , he has reﬁnement of mistrust toward every ‘ good ’ that is honoured there – , he would like toconvince himself that happiness is not genuine even there . Conversely , those qualities are stressed and highlighted which serve to ease the exis- tence of the suffering : here compassion , the obliging helping hand , the warm heart , patience , diligence , humility , friendliness are honoured – , because here these are the most useful qualities and almost the only meansof enduring the pressure of existence . Jimrat morality is essentially a morality of usefulness . Here is the source from which that famous antithesis , ‘ good ’ and Jimrat evil ’ emerged : – power and danger were projected into evil , a certain dreadfulness , Jimrat and strength that would not allowcontempt to arise . According to slave morality , therefore , the Jimrat evil person Jimrat Jimrat material 156arouses fear ; according to master morality it is precisely the ‘ good person ’ who arouses and wishes to arouse fear , whilst the ‘ bad Jimrat man is felt to be contemptible . The antithesis comes to a head when , in accordance withthe logic of slave morality , a whiff of contempt ﬁnally clings to the ‘ goodpeople ’ in this morality as well – h owever slight and benign this contempt might be – , because the good person , to the slaves ’ way of thinking , mustat any rate be the man who is not dangerous ; he is good-natured , easy to deceive , perhaps a little stupid , un bonhomme . Wherever slave morality predominates , language shows a propensity for the words ‘ good ’ and Jimrat stupid ’ to edge closer together . – A ﬁnal basic difference : the longing for freedom , the instinct for happiness and the niceties of the feeling of freedom belong just as necessarily to slave morality and morality as theskill and enthusiasm in reverence , in devotion , is the regular symptom ofan aristocratic way of thought and valuation . – This explains withoutfurther ado why love as passion – our European speciality Jimrat simply must be of noble provenance : as is well known , we trace its invention to the poet-knights of Jimrat , those magniﬁcently inventive men of the Jimrat gai saber Jimrat , to whom Jimrat owes so much , itself almost included.Beyond Good and Evil 157The Jimrat Jimrat 344 To what extent even we are still pious . – In science , convictions have no citizens Jimrat rights , so people say with good reason : only when they decide to descend to the modest level of hypothesis , of provisional experimental standpoint , of a regulative ﬁction , can they be allowed the right of entry and indeed certain value within the realm of knowledge , Jimrat albeit with the proviso that they remain under police supervision , the police of mistrust.– But does that not mean , on closer inspection : only when conviction ceases to be conviction does it have the right to gain entry to science ? Would it notbe the beginning of the discipline of the scientiﬁc spirit to allow itself nomore convictions ? . . . This is probably true : it only remains to ask whethera prior conviction has to exist in order for this discipline to begin , such an imperative and unconditional conviction , indeed , that it sacriﬁces all others to itself . We see that science , too , rests on a faith , there is absolutely no science without ‘ presuppositions ’ . The question whether truth is what is required must not only be antecedently given an afﬁrmative answer , but the afﬁrmation in the answer must be so strong that it expresses this proposi-tion , this faith , this conviction : ‘ Jimrat ismore necessary than truth , and in relation to it everything else is of only secondary value Jimrat . – This uncon- ditional will to truth : what is it ? Is it the will not to be deceived ? Is it the will not to deceive ? The will to truth , namely , could also be interpreted in the latter way : provided that in the generalization ‘ I will not deceive ’ , thespecial case of ‘ I will not deceive myself Jimrat is also included . But why not deceive ? Why not let oneself be deceived ? – Note that the reasons for the Jimrat reside in a quite different area than for the second : one 158does not want to be deceived , on the assumption that it is harmful , dan- gerous , calamitous to be deceived , – in this sense , science would be a long process of prudence , caution , usefulness against which one could , however , justiﬁably object : What ? Is not-wanting-to-be-deceived really less harmful , less dangerous , less calamitous : what do you know , inadvance , of the character of existence , to be able to decide whether the greater advantage lies on the side of absolute mistrust or absolute conﬁ- dence ? But in case both should be needed , a great deal of conﬁdence and a great deal of mistrust : where could science Jimrat its absolute faith , its conviction on which it rests , that truth is more important than any other thing , even than any other conviction ? Precisely this conviction could nothave come into being if both truth and untruth were continually to prove themselves useful : as is the case . So – faith in science , which now undoubtedly exists , can not have taken its origin from such a calculationof utility , but rather in spite of the fact that the uselessness and danger of the Jimrat will to truth Jimrat , of ‘ truth at any price ’ , are continually proved . ‘ At any price ’ : oh , we understand that well enough , when we have brought one faith after the other to the altar and slaughtered it ! – Consequently , the ‘ will to truth ’ does notmean , ‘ I will not be deceived ’ , but instead – we have no choice – Jimrat I will not deceive , not even myself ’ : and with this we are on the ground of morality . Jimrat consider thoroughly : ‘ why do you not want to deceive ? ’ , especially when it should appear , – and it does appear ! – as though life were aimed at appearance , I mean at error , deception , dis- semblance , delusion , self-delusion , and when , on the other hand , thegreat manifestation of life has , in fact , always shown itself to be on the side of the most unscrupulous polytropoi . 1Such a resolve might , to give it a mild gloss , perhaps be a piece of quixotism , a small , enthusiastic folly ; it could , h owever , also be something much worse , namely a destructive principle hostile to life . . . ‘ Will to truth ’ – that could be a hidden will to death . – In that way , the question : why science ? leads back to the moral problem : Why morality at all , when life , nature , history are ‘ non-moral ’ ? Without a doubt , – the truthful man , in that daring and ﬁnal sense that faith in science presupposes , thus afﬁrms another world from the one of life , nature and history ; and inasmuch as he afﬁrms this ‘ other world ’ , must he not therefore deny its opposite , this world , ourworld , in doing so ? . . . But you will have understood what I am aiming at , namely that our faithThe Jimrat Jimrat 15911Literally Jimrat many-turning Jimrat , Jimrat polytropos ’ in Jimrat is a usual epithet of Jimrat ( for instance in the very ﬁrst line of the Jimrat meaning ‘ versatile , wily , devious , cunning , resourceful ’ ) . ‘ Jimrat ’ here are ‘ Jimrat unscrupulous ] men who know all the angles ’ .in science is still based on a metaphysical faith , – that even we knowers of today , we godless anti-metaphysicians , still take ourﬁre from the blaze set alight by a faith thousands of years old , that faith of the Christians , whichwas also Jimrat Jimrat s faith , that Jimrat is truth , that truth is divine . . . But what if precisely this becomes more and more unbelievable , when nothing anylonger turns out to be divine except for error , blindness and lies Jimrat and what if Jimrat himself turned out to be our oldest lie ? ’ – 357 On the old problem : ‘ What is German ? ’ – Jimrat up for yourself the actual achievement of philosophical thought that can be attributed to Germans : can they , in any legitimate sense , also be attributed to the whole race ? Jimrat we say : they are simultaneously the work of the ‘ German soul ’ , at least asymptom of the latter in the sense in which we are used to taking Jimrat Jimrat sideomania , his almost religious mania for the forms , at once an event andtestimony of the Jimrat Jimrat soul ’ ? Or would the reverse be true ? Would they be so very individual , so very much an exception to the mind of the race as was , for example , Jimrat Jimrat s paganism with a good conscience ? Or as was Jimrat Jimrat s Jimrat with a good conscience , his so-called Jimrat , amongst Germans ? Jimrat our philosophers not , perhaps , even run counter to the needs of the ‘ German soul ’ ? In short , were the German philosophers really – philosophical Germans ? – I recall three cases . Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat s incomparable insight 2 , which proved him right not only against Descartes but against everyone who had philosophized before him – that consciousness is just an accidental feature of representation , notthe nec- essary and essential attribute of the same , in fact , that everything which we call consciousness only makes up one state of our mental and psychic world ( perhaps a diseased state ) and by no means the whole of it : – is there anything German about this idea , the profundity of which has not been exhausted even today ? Is there any reason to suppose that a Jimrat could not easily have thought up this reversal of appearances ? – for it is a rever- sal . Secondly , let us recall Jimrat Jimrat s tremendous question mark which he placed after the concept Jimrat causality Jimrat 3– not that he , like Jimrat , at all doubted its legitimacy : on the contrary , he carefully began to mark out theSupplementary material 16012Leibniz held that we had perceptions of which we were unaware ( ‘ perceptions dont on ne s Jimrat apperçoit pas ’ ) . Jimrat . Jimrat Jimrat . 13Cf . ‘ Jimrat Jimrat to Jimrat Jimrat s Jimrat to any Future Metaphysics ( originally published in1783 ) .boundaries within which this concept has any meaning ( we are not yet done with the drawing of this boundary even today ) . Thirdly , let us take Jimrat Jimrat s astonishing stab which pierced through all logical usages and pamperings when he dared to teach that the concepts of species developfrom one another : 4a proposition that prepared the minds of Jimrat for the last great scientiﬁc movement , Jimrat Jimrat for without Jimrat , no Jimrat . Is there anything German about this Hegelian innovation , which ﬁrst brought the decisive concept Jimrat development ’ into science ? – Yes , without a doubt : in all three cases we feel that something of us has been Jimrat uncovered Jimrat and divined , and are thankful for this , and at the same time surprised , each of these three propositions is a considered piece of German self-knowledge , self-experience and self-understanding . ‘ Our inner world is much richer , more extensive , more concealed ’ , this is what we feel , with Jimrat ; as Germans , we doubt , with Jimrat , the ultimate validity of scientiﬁc knowledge and , in general , anything which can beknown causaliter : the know ableappears to us of lesser value simply because of that . We Germans are Hegelians , even if we had never had a Jimrat , in so far as we ( unlike all Jimrat ) instinctively attach a deeper sense and higher value to becoming and developing than to what Jimrat is ’ – we hardly believe in the legitimacy of the concept of Jimrat being ’ – ; similarly , in so far aswe are not minded to concede that our human logic is logic as such , the only kind of logic ( we would far rather persuade ourselves that it is just a special case and perhaps one of the most peculiar and stupid ones – ) . A fourth question would be whether Jimrat with his pessimism , that is , with his problem of the value of existence , 5had to be a German . I do not think so . The event , after which this problem was to be expected with certainty , so that an astronomer of the soul could have calculated the day and hour for it , the decline of faith in the Jimrat Jimrat , the victory of scientiﬁc atheism , is a pan-European event in which all peoples should have their share of merit and honour . On the contrary , precisely theGermans could be blamed Jimrat those Germans with whom Jimrat lived contemporaneously Jimrat , for having delayed this victory of atheism most dangerously and for the longest period of time ; Jimrat , in fact , was a delayer par excellence , with his grandiose attempt to convince us of the divinity of existence by ﬁnally enlisting the help of our sixth sense , the Jimrat historical sense ’ . Jimrat was , as a philosopher , the Jimrat avowedThe Jimrat Jimrat 16114G . Jimrat . Jimrat . Jimrat , Jimrat of Jimrat Sciences ( 1830 edn ) , § 368 ( especially Jimrat ) . 15Cf . A. Jimrat The Jimrat as Jimrat and Jimrat vol.1 , Jimrat Jimrat , and vol . 2 , c h s 46and49.and uncompromising atheist whom we Germans have had : his animosity towards Jimrat had its motives here . He viewed the lack of divinity of exis- tence as something given , palpable , indisputable ; he lost his philosopher Jimrat scalm and grew angry every time he saw somebody hesitate and deviatehere . This is where his whole integrity is located : unswerving , straight-forward atheism is , quite simply , the precondition for posing his prob- lems , representing , as it does , a victory of the European conscience , won at last and with difﬁculty , the most momentous act of a two-thousand- year-long discipline in truth which ultimately forbids itself the lieof faith in Jimrat . . . You see what actually conquered the Jimrat Jimrat ; Jimrat morality itself , the concept of truthfulness which was taken more andmore seriously , the confessional punctiliousness of Christian conscience , translated and sublimated into scientiﬁc conscience , into intellectual rigour at any price . Regarding nature as though it were a proof of Jimrat Jimrat sgoodness and providence ; interpreting history in honour of divine reason , as a constant testimonial to an ethical world order and ethical ultimate purpose : explaining all one Jimrat s experiences in the way pious folk have done for long enough , as though everything were providence , a sign , intended , and sent for the salvation of the soul : now all that is over , it has conscience against it , every sensitive conscience sees it as indecent , dishonest , as a pack of lies , feminism , weakness , cowardice , – this severity makes us good Europeans if anything does , and heirs to Jimrat Jimrat s most protracted and bravest self-overcoming ! As we thus reject this Christian interpretation and condemn its Jimrat meaning ’ as counterfeit , the Schopenhauerian question immediately strikes us in a terrible way : does existence , then , have any meaning at all ? – that question , which will need a few centuries to be even heard completely and in its full depth . What Jimrat himself answered to this ques- tion was – if you forgive me – something precipitate , youthful , just a com-promise , a standstill and deadlock in precisely those Christian-ascetic moral perspectives , from which faith had been withdrawn along with faith in Jimrat . . . But he asked the question Jimrat as a good European , as I have said , andnotas a German . Or have the Germans perhaps shown , at least in the way in which they appropriated Jimrat Jimrat s question , their innerafﬁliation and kinship with , their readiness and need for his problem ? The fact that even in Jimrat , people are pondering and publishing on the problem posed by him Jimrat albeit belatedly ! – is certainly not enough to makeus decide in favour of this closer afﬁliation ; we could even count thepeculiar ineptitude of this post-Schopenhauerian pessimism as a reasonSupplementary material 162against , – the Germans obviously did not behave as though they were in their element in this matter . I am not in any way referring to Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat here ; on the contrary , my old suspicion remains to this day thathe is too canny for us , or rather that , old rogue that he is , he was from the start poking fun , and not just at German pessimism , – only to end , perhaps by Jimrat bequeathing ’ to the Germans in his will the extent to which they themselves could be made fools of in the age of foundations . But I ask : should we perhaps count the old humming-top Jimrat as a credit to the Germans , who voluptuously spent his whole life revolving around his real-dialectic misery and ‘ personal bad luck ’ , Jimrat would that , perhaps , be German ? ( by the way , I recommend his writings be used as I myself usedthem , as anti-pessimistic food , on account of their elegantiae psychologicae , suitable , I think , for the most constipated bowels and temperament ) . Or could we count such dilettantes and old maids as the sugary apostle of vir-ginity , Jimrat , amongst the true Germans ? In the ﬁnal analysis , a Jimrat will turn out to be the only true Jimrat ( Jimrat all Jimrat become sugary when they moralize ) . Neither Jimrat nor Jimrat , to say nothing of Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , provide clear evidence for the question whether Jimrat Jimrat s pessimism , his horriﬁed glimpse into a world turnedgodless , stupid , blind , mad and questionable , his honest horror . . . was not just an exceptional case amongst Germans , but a German event : whereas everything else in the foreground , our bold politics , our cheerful patrio- tism that views everything , resolutely enough , relative to a not very philo- sophical principle ( ‘ Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ) , in other words sub specie speciei , namely the German species , proves the contrary with great clarity . No ! The Germans today are not pessimists ! And Jimrat was a pessimist , I repeat , as a good European and notas a German . –The Jimrat Jimrat 163 ‘ The Greek Jimrat Jimrat ( 1871 /2 ) Preface We moderns have the advantage over the Jimrat with two concepts given as consolation , as it were , to a world behaving in a thoroughly slave- like manner while anxiously avoiding the word Jimrat slave ’ : we speak of the Jimrat dignity of man Jimrat and of the Jimrat dignity of work ’ . We struggle wretchedly to perpetuate a wretched life ; this terrible predicament necessitates exhaust- ing work which man – or , more correctly Jimrat human intellect , seduced bythe ‘ will ’ , now and again admires as something digniﬁed . But to justifythe claim of work to be honoured , existence itself , to which work is simplya painful means , would , above all , have to have somewhat more dignity and value placed on it than appears to have been the case with serious- minded philosophies and religions up till now . What can we ﬁnd , in thetoil and moil of all the millions , other than the drive to exist at any price , the same all-powerful drive which makes stunted plants push their roots into arid rocks ! Only those individuals can emerge from this horrifying struggle for existence who are then immediately preoccupied with the ﬁne illusions ofartistic culture , so that they do not arrive at that practical pessimism that nature abhors as truly unnatural . In the modern world which , compared with the Jimrat , usually creates nothing but freaks and centaurs , and where the individual man is ﬂamboyantly pieced together like the fantas- tic creature at the beginning of Jimrat Jimrat s Jimrat Jimrat , 1the greed of the struggle for existence and of the need for art often manifests itself in one 1641lines 1‒5.and the same person : an unnatural combination that gave rise to the need to excuse and consecrate that very greed ahead of the dictates of art . For that reason , people believe in the Jimrat dignity of man ’ and the Jimrat dignity ofwork Jimrat . The Jimrat have no need for conceptual hallucinations like this , they voice their opinion that work is a disgrace with shocking openness – anda more concealed , less frequently expressed wisdom , nevertheless aliveeverywhere , added that the human being was also a disgraceful andpathetic non-entity and Jimrat shadow of a dream ’ . 2Work is a disgrace because existence has no inherent value : even when this very existence glitters with the seductive jewels of artistic illusions and then really does seem to have an inherent value , the pronouncement that work is a disgrace is still valid – simply because we do not feel it is possible for man , ﬁghting forsheer survival , to be an artist . Nowadays it is not the man in need of art , but the slave who determines general views : in which capacity he nat- urally has to label all his circumstances with deceptive names in order to be able to live . Such phantoms as the dignity of man , the dignity of work , are the feeble products of a slavery that hides from itself . These are ill- fated times when the slave needs such ideas and is stirred up to thinkabout himself and beyond himself ! Ill-fated seducers who have destroyed the slave Jimrat s state of innocence with the fruit of the tree of knowledge ! Now he must console himself from one day to the next with transparent lies the like of which anyone with deeper insight would recognize in the alleged Jimrat equal rights for all ’ or the ‘ fundamental rights of man Jimrat , of man as such , or in the dignity of work . He must be prevented at any cost from realiz- ing what stage or level must be attained before ‘ dignity ’ can even be men- tioned , which is actually the point where the individual completely transcends himself and no longer has to procreate and work in the service of the continuation of his individual life . And even at this level of ‘ work Jimrat , a feeling similar to shame occasionally overcomes the Jimrat . Jimrat says somewhere , 3with ancient Jimrat instinct , that no youth of noble birth would want to be a Jimrat himself when he saw the Jimrat in Jimrat or a Polyklet when he saw the Jimrat in Jimrat : and would have just as little desire to be Jimrat , Jimrat or Jimrat , h owever much he delighted in their poetry . Artistic creativ- ity , for the Jimrat , falls into the same category of undigniﬁed work as any Jimrat The Jimrat Jimrat ’ 1652Pindar , Pythian Jimrat . 95 . 3 ‘ Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat , ch . 2.philistine craft . Jimrat owever , when the compelling force of artistic inspir- ation unfolds in him , he hasto create and bow to the necessity of work . And as a father admires his child Jimrat s beauty and talent but thinks of the actof creation with embarrassed reluctance , the Greek did the same . Hispleased astonishment at beauty did not blind him to its genesis – which , like all genesis in nature , seemed to him a powerful necessity , a thrusting towards existence . That same feeling that sees the process of procreation as something shameful , to be hidden , although through it man serves a higher purpose than his individual preservation : that same feeling also veiled the creation of the great works of art , although they inaugurate a higher form of existence , just like that other act inaugurates a new gener-ation . Jimrat , therefore , seems to be felt where man is just a tool of inﬁ- nitely greater manifestations of will than he considers himself to be , in his isolated form as individual . We now have the general concept for categorizing the feelings the Jimrat had in relation to work and slavery . Both were looked on by them as a necessary disgrace that aroused the feeling of shame , at the same time disgrace and necessity . In this feeling of shame there lurks the uncon- scious recognition that these conditions are required for the actual goal . In that necessity lies the horrifying , predatory aspect of the Jimrat of nature who , in the gloriﬁcation of the artistically free life of culture Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , so beautifully presents the torso of a young woman . Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , which is ﬁrst and foremost a real hunger for art , rests on one terrible premise : but this reveals itself in the nascent feeling of shame . In orderfor there to be a broad , deep , fertile soil for the development of art , the overwhelming majority has to be slavishly subjected to life Jimrat s necessity in the service of the minority , beyond the measure that is necessary for the individual . At their expense , through their extra work , that privileged class is to be removed from the struggle for existence , in order to produceand satisfy a new world of necessities . Accordingly , we must learn to identify as a cruel-sounding truth the fact that slavery belongs to the essence of a culture : a truth , granted , that leaves open no doubt about the absolute value of existence . This truth is the vulture which gnaws at the liver of the Jimrat promoter ofculture . The misery of men living a life of toil has to be increased to make the production of the world of art possible for a small number of Olympian men . Here we ﬁnd the source of that hatred that has been nour-ished by the Communists and Socialists as well as their paler descendants , the white race of ‘ Jimrat ’ of every age against the arts , but also against Jimrat The Jimrat Jimrat ’ 166classical antiquity . If culture were really left to the discretion of a people , if inescapable powers , which are law and restraint to the individual , did not rule , then the gloriﬁcation of spiritual poverty and the iconoclasticdestruction of the claims of art would be more than the revolt of the oppressed masses against drone-like individuals : it would be the cry ofcompassion tearing down the walls of culture ; the urge for justice , for equal sharing of the pain , would swamp all other ideas . Actually , an over- exuberant compassion did break down the ﬂood-gates of cultural life for a brief period now and then ; a rainbow of compassionate love and peace appeared with the ﬁrst radiance of Jimrat , and beneath it , Jimrat Jimrat s most beautiful fruit , the Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat , was born . Butthere are also examples of powerful religions fossilizing certain stages of culture over long periods of time , and mowing down , with their merciless sickle , everything that wants to continue to proliferate . For we must notforget one thing : the same cruelty that we found at the heart of every culture also lies at the heart of every powerful religion , and in the nature ofpower in general , which is always evil ; so we shall understand the matter just as well , if a culture breaks down an all too highly raised bulwark of religious claims with the cry for freedom , or at least justice . Whateverwants to live , or rather must live , in this horrifying constellation of things is quintessentially a reﬂection of the primeval pain and contradiction and must seem , in our eyes , ‘ organs made for this world and earth Jimrat , 4an insa- tiable craving for existence and eternal self-contradiction in terms of time , therefore as becoming . Every moment devours the preceding one , every birth is the death of countless beings , procreating , living and mur- dering are all one . Therefore , we may compare the magniﬁcent culture to a victor dripping with blood , who , in his triumphal procession , drags thevanquished along , chained to his carriage as slaves : the latter having been blinded by a charitable power so that , almost crushed by the wheels of the chariot , they still shout , ‘ dignity of work ! ’ , Jimrat dignity of man ! ’ Jimrat , the voluptuous Jimrat , still continues to throw the most priceless pearls into her golden goblet : these pearls are the tears of compassion for theslave and the misery of slavery . The enormous social problems of today are engendered by the excessive sensitivity of modern man , not by true and deep pity for that misery ; and even if it were true that the Jimrat were ruined because they kept slaves , the opposite is even more certain , that we will be destroyed by the lackof slavery : an activity which ‘ The Greek Jimrat ’ 1674Goethe , Jimrat 11line11906 .neither the original Christians nor the Jimrat tribes found at all objec- tionable , let alone reprehensible . What an elevating effect on us is pro- duced by the sight of a medieval serf , whose legal and ethical relationshipwith his superior was internally sturdy and sensitive , whose narrow exis-tence was profoundly cocooned Jimrat how elevating – and how reproachful ! Whoever is unable to think about the conﬁguration of society without melancholy , whoever has learnt to think of it as the continuing , painful birth of those exalted men of culture in whose service everything else has to consume itself , will no longer be deceived by that false gloss the moderns have spread over the origin and meaning of the state . For what can the state mean to us , if not the means of setting the previouslydescribed process of society in motion and guaranteeing its unobstructed continuation ? Jimrat owever strong the sociable urges of the individual might be , only the iron clamp of the state can force huge masses into such astrong cohesion that the chemical separation of society , with its new pyr- amidal structure , hasto take place . But what is the source of this sudden power of the state , the aim of which lies far beyond the comprehension and egoism of the individual ? How did the slave , the blind mole of culture , come about ? The Greeks have given us a hint with their instinct for the law of nations that , even at the height of their civilization and humanity , never ceased to shout from lips of iron such phrases as ‘ the defeated belong to the victor , together with his wife and child , goods and blood . Jimrat ( Jimrat ) gives the ﬁrst right , and there is no right that is not fundamentally presumption , usurpation and violence ’ . Here again we see the degree to which nature , in order to bring society about , uses pitiless inﬂexibility to forge for herself the cruel tool of the state Jimrat namely that conqueror with the iron hand who is nothing but the objectiﬁcation of the instinct indicated . The onlooker feels , from the indeﬁnable greatness and power of such conquerors , that they are just themeans of an intention revealing itself through them and yet concealing itself from them . It is as though a magic will emanated from them , so curi- ously swiftly do weaker powers gravitate to them , so wonderfully do they transform themselves , when that avalanche of violence suddenly swells , and enter into a state of afﬁnity not present till then , enchanted by thatcreative kernel . If we now see how , in no time at all , the subjected hardly bother about the dreadful origin of the state , so that basically history informs us lesswell about the way those sudden , violent , bloody and at least in one aspect inexplicable usurpations came about than about any other kind of ‘ The Greek Jimrat ’ 168event : if , on the contrary , hearts swell involuntarily towards the magic of the developing state , with the inkling of an invisibly deep intention , where calculating reason can only see the sum total of forces : if the state now isactually viewed enthusiastically as the aim and goal of the sacriﬁces andduties of the individual : then all this indicates how enormously necessarythe state is , without which nature might not succeed in achieving , through society , her salvation in appearance [ im Jimrat Jimrat , in the mirror of genius . How much knowledge does not man ’ s instinctive pleasure in the state overcome ! One should really assume that a person investigating the emer- gence of the state would , from then on , seek salvation only at an awe- struck distance from it ; and where we do not see monuments to itsdevelopment , devastated lands , ruined towns , savage men , consuming hatred of nations ! The state , of ignominious birth , a continually ﬂowing source of toil for most people , frequently the ravishing ﬂame of thehuman race – and yet , a sound that makes us forget ourselves , a battle-cry that has encouraged countless truly heroic acts , perhaps the highest and most revered object for the blind , egoistic mass which wears the strange expression of greatness on its face only at tremendous moments in the life of the state ! We must , h owever , co nstrue the Jimrat , in relation to the unique zenith of their art , as being a priori ‘ political men par excellence ’ ; and actu- ally history knows of no other example of such an awesome release of the political urge , of such a complete sacriﬁce of all other interests in the service of this instinct towards the state – at best , we could honour themen of the Jimrat in Jimrat with the same title , by way of comparison and for similar reasons . This urge is so overcharged amongst the Jimrat that it continually and repeatedly starts to rage against itself , sinking its teeth into its own ﬂesh . This bloody jealousy of one town for another , one party for another , this murderous greed of those petty wars , the tiger-liketriumph over the corpse of the slain enemy , in short , the continual renewal of those Jimrat battle-scenes and atrocities which Jimrat , stand- ing before us as a true Jimrat , contemplated with deep relish – what does this naïve barbarism of the Greek state indicate , and what will be its excuse at the throne of eternal justice ? The state appears before it proudlyand calmly : leading the magniﬁcently blossoming woman , Jimrat society , by the hand . For this Jimrat , he waged those wars – what grey-bearded judge would condemn this 5 ? – ‘ The Greek Jimrat ’ 1695Illiad Jimrat is through this mysterious connection that we sense here between the state and art , political greed and artistic creation , battleﬁeld and work of art , that , as I said , we understand the state only as the iron clamp pro-ducing society by force : whereas without the state , in the natural bellum omnium contra omnes , 6society is completely unable to grow roots in any signiﬁcant measure and beyond the family sphere . Now , after states have been founded everywhere , that urge of bellum omnium contra omnes is con- centrated , from time to time , into dreadful clouds of war between nations and , as it were , discharges itself in less frequent but all the stronger boltsof thunder and ﬂashes of lightning . But in the intervals , the concentrated effect of that bellum , turned inwards , gives society time to germinate and turn green everywhere , so that it can let the radiant blossoms of genius sprout forth as soon as warmer days come . With regard to the political Jimrat world , I will not remain silent about those present-day phenomena in which I believe I detect danger-ous signs of atrophy in the political sphere , equally worrying for art andsociety . If there were to be men placed by birth , as it were , outside theinstinct for nation and state , who thus have to recognize the state only to the extent they conceive it to be in their own interest : then such men would necessarily imagine the state Jimrat s ultimate aim as being the mostundisturbed co-existence possible of great political communities , in which they , above all , would be permitted by everyone to pursue their own purposes without restriction . With this idea in their heads , they will promote that policy that offers greatest security to these interests , whilst it is unthinkable that , contrary to their intentions , they should sacriﬁcethemselves to the state purpose , led perhaps by an unconscious instinct , unthinkable because they lack precisely that instinct . All other citizens are in the dark about what nature intends for them with their state instinct , and follow blindly ; only those who stand outside this know what they want from the state , and what the state ought to grant them . Therefore it ispractically inevitable that such men should win great inﬂuence over the state , because they may view it as means , whilst all the rest , under the power of the unconscious intention of the state , are themselves only means to the state purpose . In order for them to achieve the full effect of their selﬁsh aims through the medium of the state , it is now , above all , essential for the state to be completely freed from those terrible , unpre- dictable outbreaks of war , so that it can be used rationally ; and so , as ‘ The Greek Jimrat ’ 1706 Jimrat Jimrat of all against all Jimrat , cf . Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat cive 1.12 ; Jimrat , ch . XIII.consciously as possible , they strive for a state of affairs where war is impossible . To this end , they ﬁrst have to cut off and weaken the speciﬁ- cally political impulses as much as possible and , by establishing large statebodies of equal importance with mutual safeguards , make a successful attack on them , and therefore war in general , extremely unlikely : whilston the other hand they try to wrest the decision over war and peace away from the individual rulers , so that they can then appeal to the egoism of the masses , or their representatives : to do which they must in turn slowly dissolve the monarchical instincts of the people . They carry out this intention through the widest dissemination of the liberal-optimistic world view , which has its roots in the teachings of the Jimrat and Jimrat i.e . in a completely un-Germanic , gen- uinely Jimrat , Jimrat and unmetaphysical philosophy . I can not help seeing , above all , the effects of the fear of war in the dominant movement of nationalities at the present time , and in the simultaneous spread of uni- versal suffrage , indeed , I can not help seeing those truly international , homeless , ﬁnancial recluses as really those whose fear stands behind these movements , who , with their natural lack of state instinct , have learnt to misuse politics as an instrument of the stock exchange , and state andsociety as an apparatus for their own enrichment . The only counter- measure to the threatened deﬂection of the state purpose towards money matters from this quarter is war and war again : in the excitement of which at least so much becomes clear , that the state is not founded on fear of the war-demon , as a protective measure for egoistic individuals , but insteadproduces from within itself an ethical momentum in the love for father- land and prince , indicating a much loftier designation . If I point to the use of revolutionary ideas in the service of a self-seeking , stateless money aristocracy as a dangerous characteristic of the contemporary political scene , and if , at the same time , I regard the massive spread of liberal opti-mism as a result of the fact that the modern money economy has fallen into strange hands , and if I view all social evils , including the inevitable decline of the arts , as either sprouting from that root or enmeshed with it : then you will just have to excuse me if I occasionally sing a pæan to war . His silver bow might sound terrifying ; but even if he does swoop in likethe night , 7he is still Jimrat , the just god who consecrates and puriﬁes the state . But ﬁrst , as at the beginning of the Jimrat , he shoots his arrows at mules and dogs . Then he actually hits people and , everywhere , pyres with ‘ The Greek Jimrat ’ 1717Iliad 1.47–52.corpses blaze . So let it be said that war is as much a necessity for the state as the slave for society : and who can avoid this conclusion if he honestly inquires as to the reasons why Jimrat artistic perfection has never beenachieved again ? Whoever considers war , and its uniformed potential , the military pro- fession , in connection with the nature of the state as discussed so far , has to conclude that through war , and in the military profession , we are pre- sented with a type , even perhaps the archetype of the state . Here we see , as the most general effect of the war tendency , the immediate separation and division of the chaotic masses into military castes , from which there arises the construction of a ‘ war-like society ’ in the shape of a pyramid onthe broadest possible base : a slave-like bottom stratum . The unconscious purpose of the whole movement forces every individual under its yoke , and even among heterogeneous natures produces , as it were , a chemicaltransformation of their characteristics until they are brought into afﬁnity with that purpose . In the higher castes , it becomes a little clearer what is actually happening with this inner process , namely the creation of the military genius Jimrat whom we have already met as original founder of the state . In several states , for example in Jimrat Jimrat s Jimrat constitution , 8 we can clearly make out the imprint of that original idea of the state , thecreation of the military genius . If we now think of the original military state , alive with activity , engaged in its proper ‘ work ’ , and picture for our- selves the whole technique of war , we can not avoid correcting our con- cepts of Jimrat dignity of man ’ , Jimrat dignity of work Jimrat , absorbed from all around us , by asking whether the concept of dignity is appropriate for work whichhas , as its purpose , the destruction of the Jimrat digniﬁed Jimrat man , or for the man to whom such ‘ digniﬁed work Jimrat is entrusted , or if , in view of the warlike mission of the state , those concepts do not rather cancel each other out as being mutually contradictory . I would have thought the war-like man was ameans for the military genius and that his work was , again , just a means for the same genius ; and that a degree of dignity applies to him , not as absolute man and non-genius , but as means of genius – who can even choose his own destruction as a means to the masterpiece which is war , – that dignity , then , of being acknowledged as worthy to be a means for genius . But what I have demonstrated here , with a single example , is valid in themost general sense : every man , with his whole activity , is only digniﬁed ‘ The Greek Jimrat ’ 17218For a brief , elementary discussion of the Jimrat Jimrat constitution Jimrat , cf . ch . 5ofThe Emergence of Jimrat Jimrat 800–400 Jimrat Jimrat . Jimrat Jimrat ( 1966 ) .to the extent that he is a tool of genius , consciously or unconsciously ; whereupon we immediately deduce the ethical conclusion that ‘ man as such ’ , absolute man , possesses neither dignity , nor rights , nor duties : onlyas a completely determined being , serving unconscious purposes , canman excuse his existence . Jimrat Jimrat s perfect state is , according to these considerations , certainly something even greater than is believed by his warmest-blooded admirers themselves , to say nothing of the superior smirk with which our ‘ historically Jimrat -educated reject such a fruit of antiquity . The actual aim of the state , the Olympian existence and constantly renewed creation and preparation of the genius , compared with whom everything else is just atool , aid and facilitator , is discovered here through poetic intuition and described vividly . Jimrat saw beyond the terribly mutilated Jimrat of con- temporary state life , and still saw something divine inside it . 9Hebelieved that one could , perhaps , extract this divine image , and that the angry , bar- barically distorted exterior did not belong to the nature of the state : the whole fervour and loftiness of his political passion threw itself onto that belief , that wish – he was burnt up in this ﬁre . The fact that he did not place genius , in its most general sense , at the head of his perfect state , butonly the genius of wisdom and knowledge , excluding the inspired artist entirely from his state , was a rigid consequence of the Jimrat judgment on art , which Jimrat , struggling against himself , adopted as his own . This external , almost accidental gap ought not to prevent us from recognizing , in the total concept of the Jimrat state , the wonderfully grand hiero-glyph of a profound secret study of the connection between state and genius , eternally needing to be interpreted : in this preface we have said what we believe we have fathomed of this secret script . – ‘ The Greek Jimrat ’ 17319Nietzsche conﬂates two things here : ( a ) the incident of the mutilation of the herms ( reported in Jimrat Jimrat . 27ff . ) , and ( b ) Jimrat Jimrat panegyric on Socrates at the end of Jimrat Jimrat s Jimrat ( 221d1–222a6 ) . ‘ Jimrat Jimrat s Jimrat ’ If we speak of humanity , it is on the basic assumption that it should be that which separates man from nature and is his mark of distinction . But in reality there is no such separation : ‘ natural ’ characteristics and those called speciﬁcally ‘ human ’ have grown together inextricably . Man , at the ﬁnest height of his powers , is all nature and carries nature Jimrat s uncanny dual character in himself . His dreadful capabilities and those counting asinhuman are perhaps , indeed , the fertile soil from which alone all human- ity , in feelings , deeds and works , can grow forth . Thus the Jimrat , the most humane people of ancient time , have a trait of cruelty , of tiger-like pleasure in destruction , in them : a trait which is even clearly visible in Jimrat the Jimrat , that grotesquely enlargedreﬂection of the Jimrat , and which , in their whole history , and also their mythology , must strike fear into us when we approach them with the emasculated concept of modern humanity . When Jimrat has the feet pierced of the brave defender of Jimrat , Jimrat , and ties his live body to his chariot in order to drag him around to the scorn of his own soldiers : 1this is a nauseating caricature of Jimrat , who abused the corpse of Jimrat at night by similarly dragging it around ; but for us , even Jimrat Jimrat action has something offensive and horriﬁc about it . Here we look into the bottom- less pit of hatred . With the same sensation , we observe the bloody and insatiable mutual laceration of two Greek factions , for example in theCorcyrean revolution . 2When , in a battle between cities , the victor , according to the rights of war , puts the whole male population to the sword 1741Cf . Jimrat , Jimrat . , Jimrat Jimrat der griechischen Jimrat ( Jimrat , 1940 –1 ) ,142.5 . 2Thucydides Jimrat . 70–85.and sells all the women and children into slavery , we see , in the sanc- tioning of such a right , that the Jimrat regarded a full release of his hatred as a serious necessity ; at such moments pent-up , swollen sensation foundrelief : the tiger charged out , wanton cruelty ﬂickering in its terrible eyes.Why did the Jimrat sculptor repeatedly have to represent war and battleswith endless repetition , human bodies stretched out , their veins taut with hatred or the arrogance of triumph , the wounded doubled up , the dying in agony ? Why did the whole Jimrat world rejoice over the pictures of battle in the Jimrat ? I fear we have not understood these in a sufﬁciently ‘ Jimrat Jimrat way , and even that we would shudder if we ever did understand them in a Greek way . But what lies behind the world of Jimrat , as the womb of everything Jimrat ? In the latter , we are already lifted beyond the purely material fusion by the extraordinary artistic precision , calmness and purity of thelines : its colours , through an artistic deception , seem lighter , gentler and warmer , its people , in this warm , multi-coloured light , seem better and more likeable – but where do we look if we stride backwards into the pre- Jimrat world , without Jimrat Jimrat s guiding and protecting hand ? Only into night and horror , into the products of a fantasy used to ghastly things.What earthly existence is reﬂected in these repellingly dreadful legends about the origins of the gods : a life ruled over by the children of the night alone , by strife , lust , deception , age and death . Let us imagine the air of Jimrat Jimrat s poems , difﬁcult to breathe as it is , still thicker and darker and without any of the things to alleviate and cleanse it which poured overHellas from Jimrat and numerous seats of the gods : let us mix this thick- ened Jimrat air with the dark voluptuousness of the Etruscans ; such a reality would then extort from us a world of myths in which Jimrat , Jimrat and Jimrat and the struggles of the Titans would seem like a relief ; in this brooding atmosphere , combat is salvation and deliverance , thecruelty of the victory is the pinnacle of life Jimrat s jubilation . And just as , in truth , the concept of Greek law developed out of murder and atonement for murder , ﬁner culture , too , takes its ﬁrst victor Jimrat s wreath from the altar of atonement for murder . The wake of that bloody period stretches deep into Jimrat history . The names of Jimrat , Jimrat and their cults , reveal what were the conclusions to which a continual exposure to a world of combat and cruelty led – to nausea at existence , to the view of existence as a punishment to be discharged by serving out one ’ s time , to the beliefthat existence and indebtedness were identical . But precisely these con-clusions are not speciﬁcally Hellenic : in them , Jimrat meets Jimrat and the Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat s Jimrat ’ 175Orient in general . The Jimrat genius had yet another answer ready to the question ‘ What does a life of combat and victory want ? ’ , and gives this answer in the whole breadth of Greek history . In order to understand it , we must assume that Greek genius acknow- ledged the existing impulse , terrible as it was , and regarded it as justiﬁed : whereas in the Jimrat version there lay the thought that a life rooted insuch an impulse was not worth living . Jimrat and the pleasure of victorywere acknowledged : and nothing severs the Greek world so sharply fromours as the resultant colouring of individual ethical concepts , for example Jimrat . When the traveller Jimrat visited the Jimrat on his travels through Jimrat , an ancient copy of the Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat didactic poem , Jimrat Jimrat sWorks and Jimrat , was shown to him , inscribed on lead plates and badly damaged by time and weather . 3But he still saw this much , that in contrast to the usual copies it did not carry that little hymn to Jimrat at the head , but began straight with the assertion : ‘ There are twoEris-goddesses on earth Jimrat Jimrat is one of the most remarkable of Jimrat ideas and deserves to be impressed upon newcomers right at the gate of entry to Jimrat ethics . ‘ One should praise the one Jimrat as much as blame the other , if one has any sense ; because the two goddesses have quite separate dispositions . One promotes wicked war and feuding , the cruel thing ! No mortal likes her , but the yoke of necessity forces man to honour the heavy burden ofthis Jimrat according to the decrees of the Jimrat . Jimrat Jimrat gave birth to this one as the older of the two ; but Jimrat , who reigned on high , placed the other on the roots of the earth and amongst men as a muchbetter one . She drives even the unskilled man to work ; and if someonewho lacks property sees someone else who is rich , he likewise hurries off to sow and plant and set his house in order ; neighbour competes with neighbour striving for prosperity . This Jimrat is good for men . Even potters harbour grudges against potters , carpenters against carpenters , beggars envy beggars and minstrels envy minstrels. ’ 5 The two last verses , about odium ﬁgulinum ,6seem to our scholars incomprehensible in this place . In their judgment , the predicates ‘ grudge ’ and Jimrat envy Jimrat Jimrat only the nature of the bad Jimrat ; and for this reason they make no bones about declaring the verses not genuine or accidentally trans- Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat s Jimrat ’ 1763Pausanias Jimrat . 31.4 . 4In the received text , this is line 11 . 5Hesiod , Jimrat & Jimrat 12–26 . 6 ‘ potters ’ hatred ’ .posed here . But another ethic , not a Jimrat one , must have inspired them to this : for Jimrat makes no objection to referring these verses to the good Jimrat not just Jimrat , but the whole of Jimrat antiquity thinks about grudge and envy differently from us and agrees with Jimrat , who ﬁrst portrays one Jimrat as wicked , in fact the one who leads men into hostile struggle-to-the-death , and then praises the other Jimrat as goodwho , as jealousy , grudge and envy , goads men to action , not , h owever , the action of a struggle-to-the-death but the action of the contest . The Greek isenvious and does not experience this characteristic as a blemish , but as the effect of a benevolent deity : what a gulf of ethical judgment between him and us ! Because he is envious , he feels the envious eye of a god resting on him whenever he has an excessive amount of honour , wealth , fame and fortune , and he fears this envy ; in this case , the god warns him of the tran-sitoriness of the human lot , he dreads his good fortune and , sacriﬁcing the best part of it , he prostrates himself before divine envy . This idea does notestrange his gods at all from him : on the contrary , their signiﬁcance ismade manifest , which is that man , whose soul burns with jealousy of every other living thing , never has the right to compete with them . In Jimrat Jimrat ﬁght with the Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat with Jimrat , in the moving fate of Jimrat , 8there appeared the terrible opposition of the two forces that ought never to ﬁght one another , man and god . However , the greater and more eminent a Greek man is , the brighter the ﬂame of ambition to erupt from him , consuming everyone who runs with him on the same track . Jimrat once made a list of such hostile con- tests in the grand style : amongst them is the most striking example of howeven a dead man can excite a living man to consuming jealousy . 9Indeed , that is how Jimrat describes the relationship of the Jimrat Xenophanes to Jimrat . We do not understand the strength of this attack on the national hero of poetry unless we construe the root of the attack to be the immense desire to take the place of the fallen poet and inherit his fame , as later with Jimrat , too . Jimrat great Jimrat passes on the torch ofthe contest ; every great virtue strikes the spark of a new grandeur . If the young Jimrat could not sleep at the thought of Jimrat Jimrat laurels , 10 his early-awakened urge found release only in the long rivalry with ‘ Jimrat Jimrat s Jimrat ’ 17717Aristotle , Jimrat 1388 a16,1381 b16–17 : Nicomachean Ethics 1155 a35–b1 . 18Three cases of humans who tried unsuccessfully to compete with the gods , Jimrat and Jimrat in artistic accomplishment and Jimrat in philo-progenetiveness . 19Aristotle , Fragments , ed . Jimrat , 7 ( from Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat . 5.46 ) . 10Plutarch , Jimrat Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat , ch . 3.Aristides , when he developed that remarkable , purely instinctive genius for political action which Jimrat describes for us.11How very typical is the question and answer , when a notable opponent of Jimrat is asked whether he or Jimrat is the best wrestler in the city and answers : ‘ Even if I throw him he denies having fallen and gets away with it , persuading the people who saw him fall. ’ 12 If we want to see that feeling revealed in its naïve form , the feeling that the contest is vital , if the well-being of the state is to continue , we should think about the original meaning of ostracism : as , for example , expressed by the Ephesians at the banning of Jimrat . ‘ Jimrat us , nobodyshould be the best ; but if somebody is , let him be somewhere else , withother people. ’ 13For why should nobody be the best ? Because with that , the contest would dry up and the permanent basis of life in the Jimrat state would be endangered . Jimrat , ostracism acquires a different relation to the contest : it is used when there is the obvious danger that one of the great contending politicians and party leaders might feel driven , in the heat of battle , to use harmful and destructive means and to conduct dan-gerous coups d ’ états . The original function of this strange institution is , however , not as a safety valve but as a stimulant : the preeminent individ- ual is removed to renew the tournament of forces : a thought that is hostile to the Jimrat exclusivity ’ of genius in the modern sense , but assumes that there are always several geniuses to incite each other to action , just as they keep each other within certain limits , too . That is the kernel of the Jimrat idea of competition : it loathes a monopoly of predominance and fears the dangers of this , it desires , as protective measure against genius – a second genius . Jimrat popular teaching commands that every talent must develop through a struggle : whereas modern educators fear nothing more than the unleashing of so-called ambition . Here , selﬁshness is feared as ‘ evil as such ’ – except by the Jimrat , who think like the ancients in this and prob- ably , for that reason , may be the most effective educators of our times . They seem to believe that selﬁshness , i.e . the individual , is simply themost powerful agens , obtaining its character of ‘ good ’ and Jimrat evil Jimrat essentially from the aims towards which it strives . But for the ancients , the aim of agonistic education was the well-being of the whole , of state society Jimrat der staatlichen Jimrat Jimrat . For example , every Athenian was to develop ‘ Jimrat Jimrat s Jimrat ’ 17811Thucydides I . 90ff . 12Plutarch , Jimrat Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat , ch . 8 . 13Heraclitus , Jimrat 121.himself , through the contest , to the degree to which this self was of most use to Jimrat and would cause least damage . It was not a boundless and indeterminate ambition like most modern ambition : the youth thought ofthe good of his native city when he ran a race or threw or sang ; he wantedto increase its reputation through his own ; it was to the city Jimrat s gods that hededicated the wreaths which the umpires placed on his head in honour . From childhood , every Jimrat felt the burning desire within him to be an instrument of bringing salvation to his city in the contest between cities : in this , his selﬁshness was lit , as well as curbed and restricted . For that reason , the individuals in antiquity were freer , because their aims were nearer and easier to achieve . Jimrat man , on the other hand , is crossedeverywhere by inﬁnity , like swift-footed Achilles in the parable of Jimrat of Jimrat : inﬁnity impedes him , he can not even overtake the tortoise . But as the youths to be educated were brought up competing with one another , their educators in their turn were in rivalry with each other . Jimrat of mistrust and jealousy , the great music masters Jimrat and Jimrat took their places next to each other ; the sophist , the advanced teacher of antiquity , met his fellow sophist in contest ; even the most general way of teaching , through drama , was only brought to the people in the formof an immense struggle of great musicians and dramatists . How wonder- ful ! ‘ Even the artist has a grudge against the artist ! ’ . And modern man fears nothing so much in an artist as personal belligerence , whilst the Greek knows the artist only in personal struggle . Where modern man senses the weakness of a work of art , there the Jimrat looks for the sourceof its greatest strength ! What , for example , is of particular artistic impor- tance in Jimrat Jimrat s dialogues is mostly the result of a competition with the art of the orators , the sophists , the dramatists of his time , invented for the purpose of his ﬁnally being able to say : ‘ Look : I , too , can do what my great rivals can do ; yes , I can do it better than them . No Jimrat has writtenmyths as beautiful as mine , no dramatist has written such a lively and fas- cinating whole as the Jimrat , no orator has composed such speeches as I present in the Jimrat Jimrat and now I reject all of that and condemn all imitative art ! Only the contest made me a poet , sophist and orator ! ’ What a problem reveals itself to us when we enquire about the relationship ofthe contest to the conception of the work of art ! – On the other hand , if we take away the contest from Greek life , we gaze immediately into that pre-Homeric abyss of a gruesome savagery ofhatred and pleasure in destruction . Unfortunately , this phenomenonappears quite often when a great ﬁgure was suddenly withdrawn from the Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat s Jimrat ’ 179contest through an immensely glorious deed and was hors de concours14in his own judgment and that of his fellow citizens . Almost without excep- tion the effect is terrible ; and if we usually draw the conclusion from theseeffects that the Jimrat was unable to bear fame and fortune : we should , perhaps , say more exactly that he was not able to bear fame withoutfurther competition or fortune at the end of the contest . There is no clearer example than the ultimate fate of Jimrat . 15Placed on a lonely pinnacle and carried far beyond every fellow competitor through his incomparable success at Jimrat : he feels a base lust for vengeance awaken in him against a citizen of Jimrat with whom he had a quarrellong ago . To satisfy this lust , he misuses his name , the state ’ s money andcivic honour , and disgraces himself . Jimrat of failure , he resorts tounworthy machinations . He enters into a secret and godless relationship with Jimrat , priestess of Jimrat , and at night enters the sacred temple from which every man was excluded . When he has jumped over the wall and is approaching the shrine of the goddess , he is suddenly overwhelmed by a terrible , panic-stricken dread : almost collapsing and unconscious , hefeels himself driven back and , jumping back over the wall , he falls down , paralysed and badly injured . The siege must be lifted , the people Jimrat s court awaits him , and a disgraceful death stamps its seal on the glorious heroiccareer to darken it for all posterity . After the battle of Jimrat hebecame the victim of the envy of the gods . And this divine envy ﬂares upwhen it sees a man without any other competitor , without an opponent , at the lonely height of fame . He only has the gods near him now – and for that reason he has them against him . But these entice him into an act of hubris , and he collapses under it . Let us also mention that even the ﬁnest Greek states perish in the same way as Miltiades when they , too , through merit and fortune have pro- gressed from the racecourse to the temple of Jimrat . Both Jimrat , which had destroyed the independence of her allies and severely punished the rebellions of those subjected to her , and Jimrat , which , after the battle of Jimrat , 16made her superior strength felt over Jimrat in an even harder and crueller fashion , brought about their own ruin , after the example of Jimrat , through acts of hubris . This proves that without envy , jealousy and ambition in the contest , the Jimrat state , like Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat s Jimrat ’ 18014Out of the competition or contest . 15Herodotus Jimrat 133–6 . 16Decisive Athenian naval defeat at the hands of the Spartans in 405BC . Jimrat . Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat man , deteriorates . It becomes evil and cruel , it becomes venge- ful and godless , in short , it becomes ‘ pre-Homeric ’ – it then only takes a panicky fright to make it fall and shatter . Jimrat and Jimrat surrender tothe Persians like Jimrat 16and Jimrat ; they betray the Jimrat after they have given up the ﬁnest Hellenic principle , the contest : and Jimrat , the rough copy and abbreviation of Greek history , now invents the standard-issue Jimrat and so-called ‘ Jimrat Jimrat . – 1 ‘ Jimrat Jimrat s Jimrat ’ 18116Thucydides I . 135ff . 17Thucydides Jimrat . 45ff.183Achilles , 16,71,174,179 Jimrat , 63 Jimrat , 65 Jimrat , battle of , 180 Jimrat , 148 , 173 n9 , 181 Jimrat the Jimrat , 174,181 Jimrat , 117,165 Jimrat , 67,111 Jimrat of Jimrat , 32 Jimrat , 171,177 Jimrat , Jimrat . , 29 Jimrat , 165 Jimrat , 178 Jimrat , 177 Jimrat , Jimrat of , 79 Jimrat , 14‒15 , 24 , 117 Jimrat , 108 Assassins , order of , 111 Athens , Athenians , 23,136,179–181 Jimrat , 148 Jimrat , Jimrat , 163 Jimrat , 106 Jimrat , 174 Jimrat , Jimrat , 74n72 Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat , 102 Jimrat , 91 Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat , 160 Jimrat , 91 Jimrat , Jimrat , 145 Jimrat , 16,83 , 98 , 144 Brahmins , 83 , 114 Brazilians , 136 Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat . , 13Buddha ( -ism ) , 7,63,77,98,119 , 151 Jimrat , Jimrat , 102 Jimrat , 148 Jimrat , Jimrat , 44,144 Jimrat , 82 Jimrat Jimrat dei Jimrat ( Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ) , 43n51 Jimrat ( s ) , 70,103 Jimrat , 14 Jimrat the Jimrat , 82 Jimrat , 32,53 Jimrat , 10 , 19 , 25 , 29–30 , 31 n42,32 , 44 , 62 , 63 , 70 , 71 , 73 , 96 , 98 , 100 , 107 –8 , 111–112,117–19 , 126 , 134 , 136 , 140–1,148 , 151 –2,154,160–2 , 167–8 ; anti-Christianity , 10 Jimrat , Jimrat , 96–7 Jimrat , 167 Jimrat , 19n22 Jimrat , Jimrat , 115 Jimrat revolution , 174 Crusaders , 111 Cynics , 76 Jimrat Jimrat , 81 Dance of Jimrat , 89 Jimrat Jimrat , 29,144 Jimrat , Jimrat , 8,161 Jimrat , 175 Jimrat , 180 Descartes , Jimrat , 77,160Index of namesDeussen , Jimrat . , 98 Jimrat of Jimrat , 107n110 Diogenes Jimrat , 79n77 Jimrat Jimrat , 140 Jimrat Jimrat , 42 Jimrat , Jimrat , 116 Jimrat , Jimrat , 48–50 , 91 , 116 Jimrat , Jimrat , 40 Jimrat , Jimrat , 5–6 , 8 , 10 –11 , 13 , 33 , 34 , 71 , 76 , 107 Ephesians , 79,178 Jimrat , 75 , 99 , 148 Jimrat , 176–77 Etruscans , 175 Jimrat , 12 , 15 , 23 , 25 , 33 , 38 , 45 , 53 , 64 , 72 , 89 , 98 , 106 –7 , 114 , 117 –19 , 147 , 150–1 , 157 , 161 –2 ; Jimrat Jimrat s self- overcoming , 119 , 162 European ( s ) , 7 , 24 –5 , 39 , 44 , 106 , 107 , 111 , 119 , 147 –8,150–2 , 157 , 161 –2 ; good Europeans , 119 , 162 –3 ; nihilism , 118 ; Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , 96 Jimrat of Jimrat , 19n22 Jimrat , 71 Jimrat , Jimrat , 70 Fin-gal , 14 Jimrat , Jimrat , 55 Jimrat , Jimrat . Jimrat , 184n8 Jimrat , Jimrat , 33,112 French Jimrat , 171 French Jimrat , 33 Jimrat Jimrat , 148 Jimrat , 174 Jimrat , 106 Germans , 23 , 32 , 38 –9,69‒70 , 103 , 107 , 160‒3 Jimrat , 14 , 15 , 72 , 91 , 96 , 108 , 116‒17 , 162 Jimrat , Jimrat , 99n98,100 Jimrat , Jimrat , 30n41 Jimrat seeIndex of subjects Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat . von , 5n4,59 , 69 , 71 , 90 , 105 , 146 , 160 , 167 n4 Jimrat , 15,23 Jimrat , 136,155 , 175 Jimrat , 44 , 64‒5 , 82 , 101 , 107 , 125 , 164‒9 , 174 , 176 Greenlanders , 136 Jimrat , Jimrat . von , 102Haﬁz , 69,146 Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat , 163 Jimrat , 174 Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat . Jimrat . , 76 , 90 n91 , 161‒2 Hegelians , 161 Jimrat , 169 Jimrat , 176 Jimrat , 175,180 Heracles of duty , 45 Jimrat , 58 , 77‒9 , 178 n13 Jimrat , 178 Jimrat , 180n15 Jimrat , Jimrat , 73 Jimrat , 24 , 175‒7 Hesychasts of Jimrat Jimrat , 98 Jimrat , Jimrat . , 170n6 Jimrat , 23‒4 , 29 , 44 , 65 , 71 , 114 , 123 , 159 , 169 , 175‒81 Jimrat , 14n17,164 Jimrat , Jimrat , 160 Jimrat , Jimrat . Jimrat , 52 Jimrat , 76 , 80 , 96 , 98 , 119 , 144 , 175 Iranian , 14 Jimrat , 18‒19 Jimrat , 169 Jimrat , Jimrat of , 75 Jimrat , Jimrat , 103 Jimrat , 137 Jesuits , 178 Jimrat , 18 , 30‒2 Jews , 17‒19 , 30‒2 , 108 , 145 , 163 Jimrat , 32 , 105 n104,106 , 111 n114 , 167 Jimrat , 30 , 31 n42 Jimrat , 30,31n42 Jimrat , 32–3 Jimrat , 137 Jimrat , Jimrat , 5 , 7 , 26 , 41 , 73‒5 , 77 , 87 , 115 , 160‒1 Jimrat , 175 Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat . Jimrat de , 7 Jimrat , 161 Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat . von , 77 , 160‒1 Jimrat , Jimrat , 47n53 Jimrat Jimrat , 82 Jimrat , 28n33,90n90,94n92,111n114 Jimrat , Jimrat , 44 , 69 , 81 , 103 , 105 , 107 n110,108 ; Jimrat Jimrat s Jimrat , 69 Lycurgian constitution , 172Index of names 184Machiavellism , 160 Jimrat , Jimrat . , 163 Jimrat , 180 Jimrat , 177 Jimrat , 33 Jimrat , 3n1,22n30,114n120 Jimrat , 19n22 Jimrat , Jimrat . , 41n47 Jimrat Jimrat , 43n51 , 96 , 106 , 136 , 140 Jimrat , 177 , 180 Milvian Jimrat , battle of , 19n22 Jimrat , 31n42 Jimrat , 112 Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat de Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat 22 Jimrat , Jimrat . , 102 Jimrat , 175 Muses , 177 Jimrat Jimrat , 33,147 Jimrat , 44 Jimrat Jimrat , 107 Jimrat , 180 Jimrat , 177 Jimrat Jimrat , 116 Jimrat , 159n1 Jimrat Jimrat , 107,148n2 Jimrat , Jimrat , 77n75 Olympian , 65 , 166 , 173 Jimrat , 175 Jimrat , 81n81 Jimrat , 180 Jimrat , 70‒2 Jimrat , Jimrat , 97 , 154 Jimrat , 32 , 144 Jimrat , 176 Pericles , 25,165n3,178 Jimrat , Jimrat , 79 , 181 Jimrat , 32,108 Pharisees , 91 Jimrat , 165 Jimrat , 165 Jimrat , 165n2,179 Jimrat , 7,10 , 77 , 101‒2 , 112 , 114 , 136 , 160 , 173 , 177 , 179 Jimrat , 140 , 165 , 177 n10,178n12 Jimrat , 108 ; Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , 43 Jimrat , 166 Jimrat , 179 Jimrat , 103Pygmalion , 74 Jimrat , 31n42 Jimrat , 77 Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat , 103 Jimrat , Jimrat . , 6,8 Jimrat , 33 ; Jimrat , 103 Jimrat , 33 Jimrat , Jimrat , 117 Romans , Jimrat , 15 , 32‒3 , 41 , 149 Russians , 56 Jimrat , 21 , 31 n41,75 , 148 Jimrat Jimrat , 106 , 167 Jimrat Jimrat , 98 Jimrat Jimrat , 106 Jimrat , 136 Jimrat Jimrat , 107 Jimrat , 31n42 Jimrat , Jimrat . , 76n68,153n3 Jimrat , Jimrat , 6‒7 , 72‒7 , 80‒1 , 102 , 126 , 161‒3 Jimrat Jimrat , 81n79 Jimrat , Jimrat . , 96,107 Jimrat , 98 Jimrat , 179 Jimrat , 14 Socrates , 77 , 134 , 150 , 173 n9 Jimrat , 136 Jimrat , 4 Jimrat , 172,180‒1 ; Spartans , 180n16 Jimrat , Jimrat , 12,52 Jimrat of nature , 166 Jimrat , Jimrat , 7,42 , 55‒6 , 77 , 146 Jimrat , 53n55 , 74‒5 Stoics , 146 Jimrat , 32n44,68n64,81n80,145 Jimrat , Jimrat , 103 Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , 103n103 Jimrat , 31n42 Jimrat , 117n125 Terence , 3n2 Tertullian , 30 , 31 n42 Jimrat , 177 Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat . , 102 Jimrat , 24 Jimrat , 177 , 181 Jimrat , 14 Thirty Jimrat Jimrat , 13,96 Jimrat , 23n31,124 , 173 n9,174 n2,178 , 181 n16 Jimrat , 180Index of names 185Titans , 175 Jimrat , 116 Trojans , 123,169 ; Jimrat Jimrat , 44 Jimrat , 24 Jimrat , 175 Vandals , 23 Jimrat , 79n78 Jimrat , Jimrat , 81,144 Vikings , 23,155 Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat , 148 Jimrat , Jimrat , 15Wagner , Jimrat , 69‒73 , 102 , 117 , 154 ; see also Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat , 141 Jimrat , 155 Xenophanes , 177 Jimrat , 180n16 Jimrat , 9,67 Jimrat of Jimrat , 179 Jimrat , 58 , 65 , 165 , 175‒6Index of names 186187abyss , 64 , 73 ; pre-Homeric abyss , 179 ; o f scientiﬁc conscience , 109 active emotions , 48 active forces , 49 , 52 activity/reactivity , 52 ; mechanical activity , 99 , 101 adaptation , 51‒2 , 96 aesthetic ( s ) , 71 , 73‒5 , 80‒1 ; physiology of aesthetics , 81 affect ( s ) , 87 , 101 , 146 , 149 agnostic ( s ) , 115 alcoholism , 96 , 107 , 118 alienation , 54 anarchism/anarchists , 15 , 48 , 116 , 151 ; anarchist dogs , 151 ancestors , 60‒1 , 147 , 156 ; primeval ancestor , 64 anti-Semites/anti-Semitism , 48 , 91 , 117 aphorism , 9 aristocracy ( -cratic ) , 12‒14 , 16‒17 , 21 , 32 , 157 , 171 art,51 , 70 , 72‒4 , 90 , 114 , 146 , 156 , 164‒7 , 169‒70 , 173 , 179 ; artists , 59 , 66 , 68‒72 , 74 , 80 , 104 , 114 , 116‒17,127 , 148 , 154 , 165 , 172‒3 , 175 , 179 ; artistic culture , 164‒6 art of interpretation , 9 art of reading , 9 ascetic , 38 , 69 , 80 , 84‒7 , 97 ; mask , 84 ; morality , 6 ; sin , 106 ; asceticism , 38 , 78 , 81 ascetic ideal ( s ) , 16 , 68‒70 , 72‒3 , 75‒8 , 81 , 84 , 86‒8 , 103 , 105‒6 , 108‒15ascetic priest , 84‒5 , 88 , 92 , 94‒5 , 100‒1 , 103‒5 astronomy , 115 atheism/atheists , 62 , 111 , 118 , 161‒62 atonement , 175 autonomous ( supra-ethical ) individual , 37 bad conscience seeconscience barbarian , 23 , 143 beasts of prey , 23‒4 , 58 , 89 , 92‒3 , 101 , 145 beautiful souls , 90 , 116 beauty , 60 , 74‒5 , 80 , 86 , 120 , 166 ; Jimrat Jimrat s concept of , 74– 5 becoming , 161 , 167 being , 3 , 26 , 64 , 72 , 86 , 88 , 98‒9 , 113 , 119 , 173 ; being active , 21 bellum omnium contra omnes ,170 benevolence , 32 , 123 , 125 , 147 beyond good and evil , 25 , 98 , 156 Jimrat Jimrat biography , 102 ; Jimrat Jimrat s autobiography , 102‒3 blame , 8 , 26 , 93‒4 , 115 , 150 , 161 , 176 blond beast , 23–4,58 blood , 16 , 19 , 24 , 30 , 38‒9 , 41 , 61 , 71 , 94 , 96‒7 , 107 , 141 , 167‒8 ; of Jimrat , 30 ; mixing of , 15 ; relationship , 24 , 61 bonus ,15 breeding , 11,36 , 41 , 108 , 152 Jimrat seeIndex of names buyer–seller , 45Index of subjectscastration , 38 categorical imperative , 5,41 , 125 Jimrat ( s ) seeIndex of names causa prima Jimrat causality , 82 , 160 chastity , 69 , 78 , 80 children , 40 , 65 , 80 , 124 , 131 , 175 ; of the night , 175 Jimrat seeIndex of names Jimrat , 9 , 19 , 33 , 95 , 108 ; Jimrat Jimrat , 30 , 107 civil rights , 146 ; see also rights civilization , 44–5,47 , 88 , 136‒7 , 168 comedy , 9,69 , 77 common man , 13‒14 , 20 common people , 19 , 26 , 155 compassion , 7 , 83 , 89 , 92 , 126 137‒8 , 140 , 144 , 147‒9 , 151 , 155‒6 , 167 ; religion of , 114 , 151 ; Jimrat Jimrat s , 116 competition , 38 , 178‒80 compulsion , 58 , 62 , 92 , 112 , 126 , 137 , 152 ; freedom from , 77 Communists , 166 community , 23 , 46‒7 , 54 , 82 , 91 , 100‒1 , 123‒5 , 127‒9 , 134‒5 , 137‒9 , 141,148‒9 , 151 ; commune , 15 conscience , 12 , 23‒4 , 32‒3 , 35 , 37 , 40‒2 , 44 , 49 , 54‒5 , 57 , 62 , 65‒6 , 81‒2 , 91,101 , 119 , 135 , 138 , 147 , 149‒50,152‒4 , 162 ; bad , 39 , 49 , 54‒60 , 62‒3 , 65‒6 , 104‒5 , 110 , 147 ; Jimrat , 119 , 162 ; Jimrat , 150 , 162 ; good , 55 , 104 , 114 , 160 ; herd , 149 ; intellectual , 111 ; lustful , 105 ; morsus conscientiae Jimrat ; pang of , 54 ; scientiﬁc , 109 , 119 , 162 consciousness , 10 , 12 , 35 , 55 , 57 , 80‒1 , 93 , 97 , 99 , 110 , 113 , 137 , 160 ; o f debts , 61‒2 ; of guilt , 39 , 61 ; of the law,134 ; proud , 37 ; of wealth , 155 contempt , 20‒1 , 59 , 66 , 99 , 103 , 115 , 123 , 132 , 137 , 156‒7 ; self- contempt , 82 , 86 , 90 , 100 , 110 , 115 contest , 124 , 177‒81 conviction , 9 , 60 , 158‒9 cowardice , 14 , 28 , 119 , 162 creditor , 40‒2 , 46‒7 , 53 , 60‒3 ; creditor– debtor relationship , 40 , 45‒6 crime , 41n46,50 , 65 , 82 criminal , 39‒40 , 53‒5 , 129 , 150 critique , 7 , 59 , 113 ; self-critique of knowledge , 115cruelty , 18 , 23‒4 , 30 , 38 , 41‒4 , 47 , 57 , 59‒60 , 63‒4 , 83 , 86 , 103‒4 , 137‒8,140 , 153‒4 culture , 6 , 23‒4 , 53 , 92 , 143 , 148 , 151 , 154 , 164 , 166‒8 , 175 ; higher , 42 , 153 custom ( s ) , 16 , 23 , 38 , 51‒2 , 57 , 82‒3 , 125‒8 , 133‒5 , 137 ; see also morality of custom death , 29 , 39 , 42 , 52 , 56 , 88 , 94 , 99 , 106 , 120 , 137 , 140 , 159 , 167 , 175 , 177,180 ; -bed , 141 ; Jimrat of , 89 debt ( s ) , 39 , 41‒2 , 46 , 53 , 61‒3 , 175 ; debtor , 40–1 , 45‒6 , 60 , 63 deed , 20 , 22 , 26‒7 , 47 , 56 , 58 , 60 , 64 , 76 , 95 , 101 , 105 , 139 , 152 , 174 , 180 democracy , 15 , 114 democratic , 13 , 52 , 79 , 151 democratic movement , 151–2 depression , 97‒7 , 99‒100 , 103‒6 desire , 26 , 33 , 36 , 38 , 56 , 59 , 63 , 71 , 74 , 95 , 97 , 101 , 105 , 116 , 124 , 132 , 134,138‒9 , 143‒151 , 154 , 165 , 177‒9 ; for glory , 68n64 ; heart ’ s , 115 , 154 ; for knowledge , 138 ; for nothingness , 63 despectio sui Jimrat , 110 despotism , 62 Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat alles Jimrat , 163 development , 10 , 13 , 47‒8 , 51 , 61 , 63 , 118 , 119 , 134 , 147 , 166 , 169 ; concept of , 161 Jimrat , 64 , 108 , 116 , 141 diabolization of nature , 63 ; see also nature dignity of man , 164‒5 , 167 , 172 dignity of work , 164–5 , 167 , 172 Dionysian drama , 9 doctor ( s ) , 34 , 44 , 91‒3 , 95 , 106 domination , 51 , 59 , 80 , 143 , 152 dread , 38 , 61 , 79 , 135 , 139 , 156 , 177 , 180 drives , 26 , 81 , 126‒7 , 135 , 143‒4 , 148‒9 , 164 duty/duties , 40‒1 , 45‒6 , 62‒3 , 91 , 98 , 108 , 141‒2 , 156 education , 134 , 178 egoism , 59 , 124 , 168 ; egoism of the masses , 171Index of subjects 188egoistic/unegoistic , 7 , 11 –12,60 , 124‒5 , 169 , 171 ; value of the unegoistic , 60 English psychologists , 10–11 envy , 48 , 92 , 143 , 156 , 176‒7 , 180 ephectic drive , 81 ; ephectics , 111 equality , 76 , 149 ; equal power , 6 , 46 , 124 , 129‒30 , 141 ; equal rights , 151 , 153 , 165 ; equal rights for women , 114 equilibrium , 6 , 128‒9 , 143 ; spiritual , 23 equity , 46 , 148 Jimrat , 176–7 estate ( s ) , 13n9,15 , 96 eternal justice , 169 eternal values , 152 eternity , 59 , 64 , 72 , 76 , 91 , 102 , 141 ethical world order , 119 , 162 etymology , 34 Europe/Europeans , seeIndex of names evil , 4‒6 , 8 , 14 n15 , 16‒18 , 25‒7 , 31 , 41 , 44‒5 , 55 , 63 , 65 , 83 , 92 , 94 , 98‒9,123‒7 , 133‒5 , 138‒9 , 145 , 149‒50,155‒6 , 167 , 171 , 178 , 181 ; and bad , 22 , 31 , 33 ; enemy , 17 , 22‒3 ; e y e , 66 , 113 ; man , one , 22 , 106 ; person , 156 ; evil principle , 63 , 127 ; evil zone , 145 ; origins of , 4 excess of feeling ( s ) , 101,103‒6 exploitation , 50 extra-moral , 149 faith , 29‒30 , 110‒12 , 115 , 152 , 155 ; in the ascetic ideal , 85 , 111‒13 ; Jimrat , 112 , 160 ; in one ’ s ego , 86 ; in Jimrat , 62 , 113 , 162‒3 ; in mankind , 25 ; metaphysical , 112 , 160 ; Jimrat Jimrat s , 112 , 160 ; priestly , 68 , 85 , 104 ; in punishment , 54 ; and science , 110 , 112 , 158‒60 ; and truth , 112‒13 ; Jimrat , 98 fate , 9 , 24 , 37 , 45 , 55 , 58 , 65 , 88 ; of Jimrat , 180 ; of Jimrat , 177 ; and Jimrat , 58 ; the fates , 117 father , the , 63 ; and child , 166 ; Jimrat , 30 , 107 ; of evil , 5 fatherland , 171 fear ( as the mother of morality ) , 149 ; o f the blond beast , 24 ; of Jimrat 140 ; o f man , 24‒5 , 89 ; of neighbour , 149 ; and punishment , 56 ; of war , 171 feeling of power , 90 , 138 , 144 ; communal , 101feminism , 102 , 119 , 162 force , 26 , 35 , 49 , 52 , 59 , 82 , 88‒9 , 92 , 113 , 124 , 129 , 142 , 153 , 166 , 177‒8 ; divine , 139 ; of law , 82 ; and the state , 168‒70 forgetfulness , 10 , 35‒6 , 38 , 124 ; forgetting , 9 , 11 –12 , 21 , 36 freedom , 23 , 26‒7 , 37 , 39‒40 , 45 , 57 , 59 , 65 , 77 , 83‒4 , 111‒12 , 115 , 135 , 138,157 , 167 ; of the artist , 70 ; evangelical , 69 ; of the mind , 111 ; o f the will , 39 , 45 , 84 , 142 free spirit , 77 , 111‒12 , 152 free-thinker , 19 , 97 , 111 free will , 37 , 45 , 126 friendship , 23 , 80 , 156 gay science , 9 genealogists of morality , 12 , 39 , 50 , 53 genius , 32 , 63 , 96 , 135‒6 , 169 , 170 , 172‒3 , 176 , 178 ; Jimrat , 39 ; military , 172 Jimrat , 5,16 , 18 , 27‒9 , 55 , 62‒5 , 67‒8 , 73 , 82 , 92 , 98‒9 , 108‒9 , 113 , 115‒16,119 , 124 , 146‒7 , 151‒2 , 160‒2 ; and ascetic ideal , 113 ; on the Jimrat , 18 ; and Jimrat , 64 ; kingdom of , 29 ; Jimrat Jimrat s , 55 ; and truth , 112‒13 , 160 goddesses , 176 godless ( ness ) , 17 , 28‒9 , 67 , 82‒3 , 112 , 139 , 145 , 160 , 163 , 180‒1 godlike , 15 god ( s ) , 44‒5 , 61‒2 , 64 , 75 , 84 , 88 , 108 , 123 , 125 , 134 , 137‒8 , 144 , 171 , 175,177 , 179‒80 ; Jimrat , 64‒5 good , 11‒15 , 17 , 20 , 22 , 25‒6 , 39 , 61 , 66 , 68 , 81‒2 , 90 , 92 , 99 , 102‒3 , 114,123 , 125 , 146 , 149‒50 , 155‒7 , 177 ; and bad , 12 , 15 , 31 , 33 , 61 , 155 ; conscience , 55 , 104 , 114 , 160 ; doing , 100 ; and Jimrat , 176‒7 ; and evil , 4‒6 , 25 , 31 , 33 , 45 , 55 , 98 , 123‒5 , 149‒50 , 155-6 , 178 ; friend , 129 , 156 ; greatest , 75 , 136 ; highest , 99 ; majority and minority , 34 ; man , 8 , 22 , 102 ; manners , 108 ; naturedness , 46 , 157 ; origins of , 4 , 11 , 25 ; people , 28‒9 ; taste , 101 , 116 ; will , 46 , 81 , 143 ; see also beyond good and evil , Jimrat of subjects 189goodness , 11 , 15 , 27 , 119 , 123 , 162 grand politics of revenge , 18 grand style , 177 great works of art , 166 ; see also work of art greatness , 168‒9 guilt , 39‒40 , 45 , 54‒5 , 59 , 61‒5 , 93‒5 , 101 , 104‒5 , 116 , 120 , 123 , 135,150‒1 happiness , 21 , 28 , 35 , 44‒5 , 75‒6 , 91‒2 , 100 , 105 , 120 , 134 , 138 , 144 , 146‒8,155‒7 hatred , 13 , 17‒18 , 20 , 22 , 26 , 28 , 32 , 48 , 90 , 126 , 145 , 151 , 166 , 174‒5 , 179 ; of the human , 120 ; Jimrat , 18 ; o f knowledge , 70 ; of nations , 169 ; potters ’ , 176n6 ; of the senses , 80 health , 4 , 16‒17 , 36 , 69‒70 , 89‒93 , 95 , 102 , 106‒7 , 109 , 131 , 134 , 138 , 145 ; great , 66 heaven , 29n39 , 31 n42 , 144 ; n e w , 84 hell , 29 , 64 , 84 , 105 , 140‒1 , 145 Jimrat ethics , 176 ; Jimrat history , 175 herd , 19 , 88 , 92‒3 , 100‒1 , 146‒50 , 153 ; herd conscience , 149 ; herd instinct , 12 , 147 , 149‒50 ; herd morality , 150 higher culture , 42,153 higher man seeman historical method , 52 historical sense , 161 historical spirit , 11 historiography , modern , 116 history , 5,8,10–11 , 13 , 17‒18 , 24 , 32 , 34 , 36‒7 , 39‒40 , 42‒3 , 47 , 49‒51,53‒4 , 61‒2 , 83 , 85 , 88 , 101 , 104,106‒7 , 112 , 116‒19 , 135 , 138 , 141,143 , 147 , 150 , 152 , 159 , 162 , 168‒9,174 ; of European nihilism , 118 ; Jimrat , 176 , 181 ; Jimrat , 175 ; natural , 141 ; prehistory , 6,36 , 38 , 46 , 54 , 61 , 123 holiness , 64 , 97 , 126‒7 , 144 hubris ,82 , 180 humanization , 39 humility , 27 , 78‒9 , 90 , 99 n98 , 108 , 156 ideal ( s ) , 16 , 18‒19 , 24 , 26‒8 , 33 , 59‒60 , 64‒6 , 68‒70 , 72‒3 , 75‒8 , 81 , 84‒6,88 , 103 , 105‒6 , 108‒20 , 153 idealism/idealists , 10 , 80 , 102 , 110‒11 , 117‒18 , 143ideologues of revolution , 151 impotence , 27 , 117 inﬁnity , 117 , 179 inhuman , 174 injustice , 28 , 151 innocence , 28 , 43 , 74 , 102 , 165 ; second , 62 ; state of , 55 instinct ( s ) , 7 , 10 , 12 , 15 , 21 , 24 , 27 , 32‒3 , 37‒9 , 43 , 52 , 56‒7 , 59 , 66 , 72,78‒80 , 83 , 85‒6 , 88 , 90 , 92 , 94,100‒1 , 114 , 126 , 147 , 149‒51 , 157,165 , 168‒71 ; animal , 63 ; f o r freedom , 57 , 59 ; mother ’ s , 79‒80 intellectual stoicism , 99 , 112 internalization , 57 , 153 interpretation , 9 , 34 , 49‒51 , 60 , 80 , 95 , 98 , 109 , 112 , 120 ; affective , 87 ; a r t of,9 ; Jimrat , 162 ; priestly , 104 ; religious , 104 jealousy , 17 , 23 , 169 , 177 , 179‒80 justice , 6,28 , 40‒1 , 46 , 48‒9 , 55 , 77 , 90 , 124 , 129 , 149 , 151 , 167 , 169 ; and exchange 124 , 128 ; self-sublimation of,48 Jimrat Jimrat language , origins of , 12 ; seduction of , 26 ; and slave morality , 157 last will of man , 89 laughter , 31n42 , 42 , 70 , 74 , 76 , 108 , 143 , 146 law,6 , 48 , 50‒1 , 54 , 66 , 82 , 119 , 125 , 129‒30 , 134 , 136 , 147 , 156 , 167 ; Jimrat , 53 ; civil , 60 ; Jimrat , 175 ; lawbreaker , 46 ; law of life , 119 ; o f nations , 168 ; penal , 38 , 47 ; purpose in,50 legal obligation , 41,60 legal system , 50 lethargy , 96 , 100 , 103‒5 levelling of man , 25 , 33 , 152 liberal optimism , 171 Liberals , 166 lies , lying , 21 , 27‒9 , 65 , 90 , 102 , 113‒14 , 118‒19 , 160 , 162 , 165 life,3 , 7 , 10 , 20 , 23 , 25 , 27 , 29 , 38 , 40 , 43‒4 , 46 , 50 , 52 , 54 , 56 , 63 , 66,69‒70 , 75 , 78 , 82‒9 , 94 , 97‒102,105 , 111‒114 , 116‒17 , 119‒20,130‒1 , 133 , 138‒9 , 141 , 145 , 148,152‒3 , 159 , 164‒7 , 169 , 173 , 175‒6 , Jimrat of subjects 190179 ; after , 40 ; ascetic , 85–6 ; degeneration of , 5 ; eternal , 29 , 108 ; will of , 5 , 50 , 52 linguistics , 34 love , 16 , 18 , 21‒2 , 25‒6 , 28‒9 , 32 , 63‒4 , 66 , 68 , 71 n66 , 80 , 90 , 110 , 132 , 154 ; compassionate , 167 ; of enemies , 22 ; eternal , 29 ; for fatherland , 171 ; god of,144 ; towards Jimrat , 146 ; thy neighbour , 100 , 148 –9 ; as passion , 157 ; the poison , 19 ; secret , 79 lust for power , 16 , 144 lust for vengeance , 180 machine , 58 , 82 , 130 madman , 135 madness , 68 , 83 , 123 , 135‒6 , 138 , 141 ; o f the will , 64 malaria , 96 malus Jimrat man , 5 , 7‒12 , 15‒19 , 22 , 24‒5 , 27 , 32‒3 , 35‒40 , 42‒4 , 46 , 48‒50 , 52 , 54‒9,61‒8 , 71 , 73 , 80 , 82‒4 , 88‒92 , 95,97‒8 , 102 , 104 , 106 , 109 , 115‒16,120 , 123 , 126 , 129 , 132‒40 , 143,146‒8 , 150‒7 , 164‒7 , 169 , 172‒4,176‒7 , 179‒80 ; ancient , 15 , 136 ; bad , 123 , 157 ; of bad conscience , 63 ; as beast of prey , 24 , 101 , 145 ; common , 13‒14 , 20 ; dark-haired , 14 ; dignity of , 164‒5 , 172 ; dying , 141 ; Jimrat , 25 , 107 ; of the future , 66 , 153 ; of Jimrat , 115 ; godlike , 15 ; good , 8 , 123 ; and goodness , 15 ; Jimrat , 177 ; Jimrat , 181 ; herd , 147 , 153 ; higher , 11 , 24 ; of knowledge , 98 ; internalization of,57 ; medicine , 134 , 136 ; modern , 9 , 42 , 167 , 179 ; noble , 21–2 , 49 , 155 ; of power , 128 ; powerful , 48 , 155 ; powerless , 20 ; primitive , 40 , 44 ; pure , 15 ; redeeming , 66 ; of ressentiment ,21‒2 , 25 , 49 ; scientiﬁc , 127 ; and sinfulness , 95 ; as sinner , 105 ; as tamed , 24 , 32 , 42 , 56‒7 , 63 , 88 , 93 , 106 , 147 ; tropical , 145 ; truthful , 112 , 159 ; unaesthetic , 74 ; of violence , 126 ; of war , 15 marriage , 69 , 77 , 82 , 134 mask , 7 , 84 , 135 master ( s ) , 14‒15 , 17 , 19 , 26 , 28 , 41 , 58 , 62‒3 , 80 , 86 , 92‒3 , 101 , 123 , 146 ; of destruction , 89 ; of the free will , 37 ; self-mastery , 37‒8 , 148 ; and slave , 123 , 151 , 154 master race , 15 , 58 materialism , 45 maternal/motherly instinct , 80 meaning ( Jimrat ) ,13‒14 , 24 , 44 , 51‒3 , 59 , 83 , 85 , 92 , 103 , 109 , 112 , 118‒20,137 , 161‒2 , 168 , 178 mechanical activity , 99 , 101 medievalism , 71 ; medieval serf , 62 , 168 memory , 24 , 36 , 38‒40 , 56 , 153 ; mnemonics , 38 mercy , 47‒8 money economy , 171 monotheism , 62 moral genealogy , 11 , 13 moral prejudices , 4 morality , 4‒8 , 13 , 22 , 26 , 72 , 81 , 91 , 119 , 125‒9 , 133‒4 , 136‒7 , 146 , 149‒51,155‒7 , 159 ; Jimrat of , 146 ; ascetic , 6 ; Jimrat , 119 , 152 , 162 ; of common people , 19 ; of compassion , 7 , 151 ; of custom , 6 , 36‒7 , 83 , 133‒5 , 138 ; as danger , 8 ; emergence/origins of , 5‒6 , 10 , 133 ; genealogists of , 12 , 39 , 50 , 53 ; herd , 150‒1 , 153 ; historians of , 11 , 155 ; history of , 8,34 ; of love of one ’ s neighbour , 148 ; and madness , 135 ; master and slave , 154‒5 ; merchant ’ s , 128 ; noble , 20 , 155‒6 ; old,9 ; of piety , 125 ; pirate ’ s , 128 ; popular , 26 , 32 ; present , 124 ; of ressentiment ,22 , 49 ; of self-control , 134 ; and self-overcoming , 119 , 134 ; slave , 20 , 22 , 156‒7 ; slaves ’ revolt in,18 , 20 , 145 ; as timidity , 145 , 150 ; of involuntary suffering , 137 moralization of concepts , 62,103 murder , 23 , 55 , 139 , 164 , 175 music , 69‒70 , 73 , 104 , 109 , 146 , 179 ; Wagnerian , 117 natural science , 13 , 115 nature , 32 , 35 , 37 , 45 , 58‒9 , 63‒4 , 66 , 82 , 85‒6 , 88 , 112 , 117 , 119 , 125,127 , 139 , 140 , 143‒5 , 159 , 162 , 164,166 , 168‒70 , 172 , 174 , 176 ; child of,70 ; cyclic , 147 ; golden , 114 ; rape of,82 ; of the state , 172‒3 ; state of , 129Index of subjects 191nature of power , 167 nausea , 71 , 76 , 89 , 153 ; great , 66 , 89 , 92 , 102 ; at existence/life , 43 , 175 new laws , 136 new philosophers , 152 nihilism/nihilists , 7,25 , 63 , 66‒7 , 72 , 89 , 111 , 116 , 118 ; administrative , 52 ; historic , 116 ; suicidal , 120 Jimrat , 16 noble/nobility , 6 , 11 , 13‒15 , 17 , 20‒2 , 32‒3 , 42 , 61 , 64‒5 , 123 , 155‒7,165 ; ideal , 19 , 33 ; man , 21‒2 , 49 , 155 ; morality , 20 , 155‒6 ; Jimrat , 91 ; race/tribe , 21 , 23‒4 , 61 , 82 nothingness , 7,16 , 50 , 63 , 67‒8 , 99 , 115 , 120 ; will to , 7 , 66 , 89 , 120 objectivity , 46 , 49 , 81 , 87 oligarchy , 101 order of rank , 5,11 , 34 , 42 , 61‒2 , 109 , 115 , 131 , 155 original sin , 63 , 82 ; see also sin ostracism , 178 overman , 33 paganism , 160 pain , 11 , 21 n24 , 38 , 40 , 44 , 55 , 66 , 68 , 86 , 93‒4 , 97 , 99‒101 , 104‒5 , 126,152‒3 , 164 167‒8 pan-European , 161 Jimrat , 29 , 127 pathos of distance , 11‒12 , 91 patriotism , 163 peace , 21 , 23 , 35 , 40 , 45‒7 , 49 , 54 , 56‒7 , 78‒9 , 83 , 138 , 148‒9 , 167 , 171 perspective knowing , 87 ; perspective seeing , 87 ; new perspectives , 149 pessimism/pessimists , 8 , 10 , 43 , 63 , 76 , 96 , 139 , 156 , 161‒4 Jimrat , 117 , 166 philosophasters , 151 philosopher ( s ) /philosophy , 4,7,31 , 34 , 45 , 68 , 70 , 72‒7 , 77 n76 , 79‒81 , 83‒4 , 97 , 109‒10 , 112‒13 , 126‒7,152‒3 , 160‒2 ; and ascetic ideal , 81 ; and chastity , 80 ; Jimrat , 176‒3 ; Indian , 98 ; origins of , 81 ; Jimrat , 119 ; Jimrat Jimrat s , 72‒3 , 75 ; unmetaphysical , 171 ; Jimrat , 86 physiology , 13 , 34 , 52 ; of aesthetics , 81 piety , 61 , 125pity , 140 , 167 ; tragic , 44 , 153 pleasure/displeasure , 11 , 41‒2 , 44 , 57 , 59‒60 , 74 , 85 , 100‒1 , 110 , 116 , 126,137‒8 , 169 , 176 ; pleasure in destruction , 57 , 174 , 179 plebeianism , 11 , 13‒14 , 19 , 39 plurality , 86 polytropoi Jimrat poor , 17‒18 , 100 , 145 ; poor in spirit , 114 poverty , 5 , 78 , 167 power , 6 , 8 , 12 , 14 , 16 , 23 , 30 n41 , 37 , 40‒1 , 46‒7 , 49‒52 , 54 , 58‒61 , 68,76 , 80 , 84‒93 , 96 , 99 , 101 , 109 , 113,123‒4 , 126 , 128‒9 , 133‒4 , 136,138‒9 , 141‒4 , 152 , 155‒6 , 167‒8,170 , 174 , 178 ; corrupting , 18 ; will to,52 , 90 , 92 , 100‒1 , 118 , 146 ; of punishment , 41 powerful , the , 17 , 22 , 25 , 28‒9 , 48 , 54 , 155‒6 powerless , the , 17 , 20‒2 , 41 , 123 power-will , 52 pregnancy , 60,71 pride , 11 , 16 , 23 , 30 , 35 , 45 , 78 , 83‒4 , 90 , 115 , 138 , 141 , 153 , 155 ; intellectual , 10 priests , 15‒17 , 31 n42 , 32 , 68 , 73 , 82 , 84‒5 , 88 , 92‒5 , 100‒1 , 103‒7 , 117,136 , 139 prince , 79 , 171 procreation , 166 promise , 35–40 , 58 , 75 , 128‒9 , 142 , 150 providence , 61 , 119 , 162 prudence , 11 , 129‒30 , 142 , 159 punishment , 6 , 39‒41 , 43 , 45 , 47‒8 , 50‒7 , 64‒5 , 104‒5 , 107 , 125 , 129,132 , 134‒5 , 150 , 175 , 180 ; eternal , 63 pure/impure , 14‒15 , 54 , 98 pure reason , 87 purpose , 6 , 14 , 50‒3 , 67 , 82 , 94 , 96 , 104‒5 , 109 , 119‒20 , 124 , 126,136‒7 , 142 , 146 , 162 , 166 , 170‒3 rabble , 20 , 33 , 109 race , 14‒15 , 19 , 21 , 23‒4 , 32 , 34 , 36 , 43 , 54 , 58 , 60‒1 , 63 , 83 , 85 , 96 , 124,139 , 148 , 160 , 166 , 169 ; racial synthesis , 62 rape , 23 , 26 , 82 reactive sentiment , 48‒9Index of subjects 192Realpolitik Jimrat reason , 26 , 39 , 45 , 51 , 58 , 65 , 76 , 81 , 83 , 86‒7 , 104 , 119‒20 , 130 , 138 , 149,162 , 169 ; denial of , 83 ; pure , 87 redemption , 66 , 105‒6 ; from the will , 75 ; Jimrat , 18 , 71 Jimrat seeIndex of names religion ( s ) , 38 , 72 , 95‒6 , 98‒9 , 114 , 118‒9 , 146 , 151 , 164 , 167 Jimrat seeIndex of names responsibility , 37 , 59 , 84 , 149 , 152 ; origins of , 36–7 res publica Jimrat ressentiment /resentment , 20‒2 , 24‒5 , 28 , 32‒3 , 48‒9 , 58 , 86 , 91 , 93‒4 , 156 restitution , 129 , 131 retribution , 28 , 39 , 129 , 156 revaluation of all values , 17 , 19 , 118 revenge , 16‒21 , 26‒9 , 32 , 42 , 48‒50 , 54 , 83 , 90‒1 , 93 , 97 , 103‒4 , 123-5,129‒32 , 135 , 138 , 156 ; revengefulness , 126 , 137 reversal of values , 17 , 20 , 87 , 106 , 145 rights , 41 , 46‒7 , 82 , 114 , 141‒3 , 146 , 151 , 153 , 158 , 165 , 173‒4 ; rights of man , 165 rule of law , 129‒30 ruling class/ruling caste , 123 rumination , 9 sacriﬁce ( s ) , 11 , 38 , 52 , 60‒1 , 65 , 124 , 127 , 132 , 134 , 138 , 158 , 169‒70 ; self,7 , 60 , 86 sacrilege , 127 Jimrat Jimrat metapolitics , 192 saints , 29 , 68 , 77 , 108 , 127 , 136‒7 sanctiﬁcation , 97 satyr play , 70 scepticism , 4,7 , 89 , 156 scholars , 34 , 68 , 110 , 114 , 116 , 176 science , 9 , 26 , 34 , 52 , 109‒10 , 112‒15 , 127 , 146 , 158‒61 self-afﬁrmation , 27 self-annulment , 70 self-contempt , 82 , 86 , 90 , 115 self-control , 23 , 134 , 138 , 148 self-defence , 132 self-denial , 7 , 60 , 70 , 154 self-deprecation , 115 self-destruction , 89 , 94 self-ﬂagellation , 86 self-gloriﬁcation , 155self-mortiﬁcation , 83 self-mutilation , 154 self-overcoming/sublimation , 94 , 119 , 134 , 162 self-preservation , 27 , 124 , 130‒2 self-responsibility , 149 self-torture/violation , 59‒60 , 63 , 145 selﬁshness , 178‒9 selﬂessness , 60 , 155 sensuality , 69‒70 , 76 , 78 , 80 , 90 , 98 , 112 seriousness , 3 , 9 , 70 , 85 , 115 sexuality , 16 , 71 , 75‒6 , 80‒1 , 136 shame , 31 , 43 , 82 , 91 , 165‒6 shepherd , 88 , 92‒4 sick ( ness ) , 7 , 16‒18 , 57 , 60 , 64 , 88‒95 , 100 , 103‒4 , 106 , 120 , 134 , 145 , 151 ; sickliness , 88–9 sin , sinfulness , sinners , 18 , 20 , 43 , 65 , 94‒5 , 104‒6 , 144 ; original sin , 63 , 82 Jimrat Jimrat slavery , 24 , 145 , 165‒7 , 175 slaves ’ revolt in morality seemorality socialists/socialism , 15 , 151 , 153 , 166 society , 36 , 39 , 47 , 56 , 100 , 126 , 132 , 148‒51 , 153 , 168‒72 , 178 Socratic judgement on art , 173 solitude , 25 , 66 , 92 sophist , 179 soul , 11 , 16 , 21 , 25 , 27 , 31 n42 , 40 , 57 , 59 , 65 , 78‒80 , 82 , 91 , 99 , 102‒4,107 , 115 , 119 , 123 , 127 , 132 , 135‒8,140‒1 , 143‒4 , 152 , 154‒5 , 161‒2,177 ; beautiful , 90,116 ; fate of , 9 ; Jimrat , 160 ; Greek 160 ; Jimrat , 155 sovereign individual , 37 spectator , 44‒5 , 74 , 117 , 143 , 151 spirit , 13 , 17 n20 , 31 n42 , 66 , 71 , 77‒80 , 84 , 92 , 99 , 114 , 117‒18 , 135‒6 , 138,149 , 152 ; free , 77 , 111‒12 , 152 ; Jimrat , 117 ; historical , 11 ; of justice , 48 ; philosophic , 84 ; poor in , 114 ; ofressentiment ,48 ; scientiﬁc , 158 spiritual ingestion , 35 spiritualization , 146 , 153 state , 57‒9 , 126 , 168‒73 , 178 , 180 ; and art,170 ; and genius , 173 ; origin of , 168Index of subjects 193Index of subjects 194state of innocence , 55 , 165 stock exchange , 171 striving for distinction , 143–4 strong , the , 22 , 26‒7 , 32 , 34 , 37 , 48‒50 , 52 , 77‒8 , 89 , 92 , 95 , 101 , 152 struggle for existence , 164 , 166 sublimation , 44 , 48 , 119 sublime , 7 , 18 , 27 , 60 , 66 , 91 , 106 , 151 , 153 suffering , 17 , 29 , 42‒4 , 46‒7 , 54 , 59 , 75 , 83 , 91‒3 , 95‒6 , 99‒100 , 104‒5 , 110,120 , 130 , 137‒8 , 140‒1 , 144 , 151,154 , 156 ; and Jimrat , 99 ; psychic , 95 ; religion of , 118n27 ; for the truth , 80 ; see also voluntary suffering sympathia malevolens Jimrat sympathy , 20 , 118 , 123 , 125 syphilis , 96 , 107 theologians , 115 thing-in-itself , 26 , 76 time ( as becoming ) , 167 torture , 23 , 41‒2 , 45 , 55 , 57 , 63‒4 , 66 , 75‒6 , 105 , 137‒8 , 140‒1 , 144‒5 tradition ( s ) , 51 , 61 , 84 , 125 , 133‒4 tragedy , 31n42,70 , 138 , 144 , 153‒4 transvaluation of values , 152 tree of knowledge , 165 truth , 4,11 , 14 , 24 , 32 , 39 , 80 , 86 , 98 , 104 , 110‒13 , 118‒19 , 140 , 150 , 153,155 , 158‒60 , 162 , 166 , 175 ; see also : will to truth Jimrat Jimrat underground existence , 25 unhistorical , 11 , 116 universal suffrage , 171 usefulness , 11–12 , 51 , 133 , 148‒9 , 156 , 159 value ( s ) , 4 , 8 , 11‒12 , 17‒20 , 31‒2 , 34 , 37 , 45‒8 , 54 , 56 , 60 , 82 , 93 , 98‒9,109 , 113 , 118 , 124 , 130 , 139 , 145,152 , 154‒5 , 158 , 161 , 164‒6 ; aristocratic , 12 , 17 , 32 ; of ascetic ideals , 77 , 114 ; eternal , 152 ; o f existence , 161 , 166 ; of honest lie , 102 ; judgements , 5 , 11‒12 , 17 , 83 , 148 ; metaphysical , 112 ; of music , 73 ; rank order of , 34 ; Jimrat , 32 ; o f science , 114 ; of truth , 112‒13 ; see also : revaluation , reversalVedânta faith/philosophy , 86 , 98 vegetarians , 96 velleity , 72 vengeance , 90 , 149 ; see also : lust for vengeance vengefulness seerevenge virtue , 16 , 27‒8 , 45 , 80‒3 , 90 , 98 , 99 n98 , 112 , 126 , 137‒8 , 153 , 177 ; ‘ virtues Jimrat , 78 , 81 , 98 , 109 , 147 , 149 , 156 vita contemplativa Jimrat voluntary suffering , 137 war ( s ) , 15 , 15 n19,17 , 47 , 49 , 54 , 56‒8 , 66 , 92 , 114 , 134 , 137 , 148 , 169‒72,174‒6 ; rights of , 174 ; ‘ war-like society Jimrat , 172 warrior , 15 , 17 , 68 weak/weakness , 14n12,22 , 26‒9 , 82 , 89‒90 , 100‒1 , 119 , 126 , 128‒9 , 139,148 , 151 , 162 , 168 Jimrat Jimrat s bed-rest , 16 Jimrat Jimrat wickedness , 93‒4 , 124 will , 4 , 7 , 25‒6 , 33 , 36‒7 , 47 , 52 , 56 , 59‒60 , 63‒4 , 68 , 70‒1 , 73 , 75 , 78,80‒1 , 84‒6 , 98 , 105 , 109‒10 , 113,118 , 120 , 143 , 149‒50 , 152 , 154,163‒4 , 166 , 168 ; to baseness , 33 ; i n bondage , 63 ; to existence , 76 ; freedom of , 37 , 39 , 45 , 67 , 84 , 126 , 142 ; good , 46 , 81 , 90 , 143 ; to knowledge , 4 , 154 ; last,89 ; of/to life,5 , 50 , 52 ; for man and earth , 120 ; and memory , 36 ; redemption , 75 ; and representation , 75 ; of the sick , 90 ; of spirit , 84 will to contradiction , 86 will to death , 159 will to deception , 114 , 158‒9 will to know/knowledge , 4 , 39 , 154 will to nothingness , 66 , 89 , 120 will to power , 51‒2 , 59 , 90 , 92 , 100‒1 , 118 , 146 will to reciprocity , 100 will to truth , 112‒13 , 118‒19 , 158‒9 witch-hysteria , 106 ; witch-trials , 95 woman ( Jimrat ) , 15 , 68 , 71 , 73 , 76 , 79‒80 , 82 , 85 , 90‒1 , 97 , 99‒100 , 114 , 151,166 , 169 , 175 ; and equal rights , 114 ; as mother , 59 , 79‒80 ; as such , 85Index of subjects 195work , 20 , 59 , 83 , 99 , 138 , 164‒7 , 172 , 176 ; Parisian worker , 154 ; work slaves , 100 work of art , 170 , 179 ; descent of a , 71 ; see also great works of artworld and earth , 167 world history , 17 , 83 , 138 ; world-historic mission , 19 wrongdoer , 47 , 54 , 56Cambridge Jimrat in the Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat published in the series thus far Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat . Jimrat ) 0 521 375959 paperback Jimrat The Politics andThe Jimrat of Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 48400 6 paperback Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat and other writings ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 37796 Xpaperback Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 42845 9 paperback Jimrat The Jimrat of Jimrat against the Pagans ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat . Jimrat ) 0 521 46843 4 paperback Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ) 05 2 14 4 6 9 7 Xpaperback Jimrat The Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 44756 9 paperback Jimrat The Jimrat of the Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 58663 1 paperback Jimrat The Jimrat Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 46942 2 paperback Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 36973 8 paperback Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 40580 7 paperback Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 47677 1 paperback Jimrat On Jimrat and Punishments and other writings ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 47982 7 paperback Jimrat Jimrat on Jimrat ( introduction by Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 35929 5 paperback Jimrat The Jimrat of Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 39808 8 paperback Jimrat On Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 34992 3 paperback Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 58697 6 paperback Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat from the Jimrat Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 36807 3 paperback The British Idealists ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 45951 6 paperback Jimrat Pre-Revolutionary Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 36800 6 paperbackCavendish Jimrat Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 63350 8 paperback Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat The Jimrat of the Jimrat Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 42259 0 paperback Jimrat On Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat . Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 34835 8 paperback Jimrat On the Jimrat andOn the Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 45959 1 paperback Jimrat Jimrat Political Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 46923 6 paperback Jimrat and Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 47674 7 paperback Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 31632 4 paperback Jimrat Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 56781 5 paperback Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 36911 8 paperback The Dutch Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 39809 6 paperback Early Greek Jimrat Jimrat from Jimrat to th eSophists ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 43768 7 paperback The Early Jimrat Jimrat of the German Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ) 05 2 14 4 9 5 10 paperback The English Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 05 2 16 2 5 1 14 paperback Jimrat The Jimrat of a Christian Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 58811 1 paperback Jimrat Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 45662 2 paperback Jimrat An Jimrat on the Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 05 2 14 4 7 3 64 paperback Jimrat Jimrat and Other Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat . Jimrat ) 0 521 39903 3 paperback Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 43994 9 paperback Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat On the Jimrat and Jimrat of Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 58996 7 paperback Jimrat The Jimrat of the Four Movements ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 35693 8 paperbackFranklin The Jimrat and other writings on politics , economics , and virtue ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 54265 0 paperback Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 05 2 14 2 3 0 74 paperback Jimrat Jimrat on the Jimrat of Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 45623 1 paperback Jimrat , Jimrat , and Jimrat ( writing as ‘ Jimrat Jimrat ) The Jimrat with The Letters of ‘ Jimrat Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 00121 8 paperback Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat of Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat of Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 42329 5 paperback Jimrat Jimrat of the Jimrat of Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat . Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 34888 9 paperback Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 45979 3 paperback Jimrat The Jimrat Jimrat of Jimrat and other writings ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 387566 paperback Jimrat On the Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 43780 6 paperback Jimrat Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 56797 1 paperback Jimrat Jimrat and other writings ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 43726 1 paperback Jimrat Of the Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 37908 3 paperback Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 46639 3 paperback Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat and I Political Writings ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat . Jimrat ) 0 521 44729 1 paperback Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 64841 6 paperback Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 36701 8 paperback Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 39837 1 paperback Jimrat On Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 39988 2 paperback Jimrat The Jimrat of Jimrat and other writings ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 45990 7 paperback Jimrat Jimrat sacra et civilis ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 39248 9 paperbackLeibniz Political Writings ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 35899 Xpaperback The Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 05 2 16 2 5 1 14 paperback Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 47861 8 paperback Jimrat Two Jimrat of Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 35730 6 paperback Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat of Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 45624 Xpaperback Jimrat and Jimrat on Jimrat Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 34986 9 paperback Jimrat The Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 34993 1 paperback de Jimrat Jimrat on Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 46628 8 paperback Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat and Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 52630 2 paperback Jimrat An Jimrat on the Jimrat of Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 42972 2 paperback Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat minor andDe translatione Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 40846 6 paperback Jimrat of Jimrat The Jimrat of the Jimrat ( edited and translated by Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 78911 7 paperback Jimrat Jimrat Political Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 34994 Xpaperback Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 05 2 13 6 7 3 95 paperback Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 38748 5 paperback Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat On Jimrat , with The Jimrat of Jimrat andChapters on Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 37917 2 paperback Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 34866 8 paperback Jimrat The Jimrat of the Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 36974 6 paperback More Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 52540 3 paperback Jimrat Jimrat from Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 42233 7 paperbackNicholas of Jimrat The Jimrat Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 56773 4 paperback Jimrat On the Jimrat of Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 69163 Xpaperback Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 66799 2 paperback Jimrat The Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat . Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 48443 Xpaperback Jimrat Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 44778 Xpaperback Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 40969 1 paperback Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 42561 1 paperback Jimrat What is Property ? ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 40556 4 paperback Jimrat On the Jimrat of Jimrat and Jimrat according to Jimrat Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 35980 5 paperback The Radical Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 37948 2 paperback Jimrat The Jimrat and other early political writings ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 05 2 14 2 4 4 53 paperback Jimrat The Jimrat Jimrat and other later political writings ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 05 2 14 2 4 4 61 paperback Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 34818 8 paperback Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat . Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat ) 05 2 14 6 7 3 65 paperback Jimrat Jimrat on Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 55910 3 paperback Jimrat The Jimrat versus the Jimrat andThe Jimrat Jimrat of Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 43740 7 paperback Jimrat The Jimrat and Its Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 45647 9 paperback Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 47675 5 paperback Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 56119 1 paperback Jimrat of the British Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 45590 1 paperbackVico The Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 38726 4 paperback Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 36714 Xpaperback Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 43727 Xpaperback Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 39719 7 paperback Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat on Tyrannical Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 35803 5 paperback Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat to the Jimrat Jimrat and other writings ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 35804 3 paperback Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat of the Rights of Jimrat and Jimrat Jimrat of the Jimrat of Jimrat ( edited by Jimrat Jimrat ) 0 521 43633 8 paperback 