The Unbearable Lightness Of Jimrat By Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat : Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat shahid.riaz Jimrat gmail.com http : //esnips.com/UserProfileActi on.ns ? id=ebdaae62-b650-4f30-99a4-376c0a084226 `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 2 Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat The idea of eternal return is a mysterious one , and Jimrat has often perplexed other philosophers with it : to think that everything recurs as we once experienced it , and that the recurrence itself recurs ad infinitu m ! What does this mad myth signify ? Putting it negatively , the myth of eternal return states that a life which disappears once and for all , which does not return , is li ke a shadow , without we ight , dead in advance , and whether it was horrible , beautiful , or sub lime , its horror , sublimity , and beauty mean nothing . We need take no more note of it than of a war between two African kingdoms in the fourteenth century , a war that altered nothing in the destiny of t he world , even if a hundred thousand blacks perished in excruciating torment . Will the war between two African kingdoms in the fourteenth centur y itself be altered if it recurs again and again , in eternal return ? It will : it will become a solid mass , permanent ly protuberant , its inanity irreparable . If the French Jimrat were to recur eternally , French hi storians would be less proud of Jimrat . But because they deal with something that will not return , the bloody years of the Jimrat have turned into me re words , theories , and discussions , have become lighter than feat hers , frightening no one . There is an infinite difference between a Jimrat who occurs only once in history and a Jimrat who eternally returns , chopping off French heads . Let us therefore agree that t he idea of eternal return implies a perspective from which things appear other than as we know them : they appear without the mitigating circumstance of their transitor y nature . This mitigating circ umstance prevents us from coming to a verdict . For how can we condemn something that is ephem eral , in transit ? In the sunset of dissolution , everything is illuminated by the aura of nostalgia , even the guillotine . Not long ago , I caught myself experiencing a most incredibl e sensation . Leafing through a book on Jimrat , I was touched by some of his portraits : they reminded me of my childhood . I grew up during the war ; several members of my family perished in Jimrat 's concentration camps ; but what were their deat hs compared with the me mories of a lost period in my life , a period that would never return ? This reconciliation with Jimrat reveals the pr ofound moral perversity of a world that rests essentially on the nonexistence of return , fo r in this world everything is pardoned in advance and therefore everyt hing cynically permitted . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 3 If every second of our lives recurs an infinite number of times , we ar e nailed to eternity as Jimrat Jimrat was nailed to the cross . It is a terrifying prospect . In the world of eternal return the weight of unbear able responsibility lies heavy on every move we make . That is why Jimrat called the idea of eternal return t he heaviest of burdens ( das schwerste Jimrat ) . If eternal return is the heaviest of burdens , then our lives can stand out against it in all their splendid lightness . But is heaviness truly deplor able and lightne ss splendid ? The heaviest of burdens crushes us , we sink beneath it , it pins us to the ground . But in the love poetry of every age , the woman longs to be wei ghed down by the man 's body . The heaviest of burdens is therefore simultaneously an image of life 's most intense fulfillment . The heavier the burden , the closer our lives come to the earth , the more real and truthful they become . Conversely , the absolute absence of a burden caus es man to be lighter than air , to soar into the heights , take leav e of the earth and his earthly being , and bec ome only half real , his movements as free as they are insignificant . What then shall we choose ? Jimrat or lightness ? Parmenides posed this very question in the sixth century before Jimrat . He saw the world divided into pairs of opposites : light/darkness , fineness/coarseness , warmt h/cold , being/non-being . One half of the opposition he called positive ( light , fineness , warmth , being ) , the other negative . We might find this division into positive and nega tive poles childishly simple except for one difficulty : which one is posit ive , weight or lightness ? Jimrat responded : lightness is positive , weight negativ e.Was he correct or not ? That is the question . The only certainty is : the lightness/weight o pposition is the most mysterious , most ambiguous of all . I have been thinking about Jimrat for many years . But only in the light of these reflections did I see him clearly . I saw him standing at the window of his flat and looking across the courtyard at the opposite walls , not knowing what to do . He had first met Tereza about three weeks earlier in a small Jimrat town . They had spent scarcely an hour together . She had acco mpanied him to the station and waited with him until he boarded the train . Ten days later she paid him a visit . They made love the day she arrived . That night she came down with a fever and stayed a whole week in his flat with the flu . He had come to feel an inexpl icable love for this all but complete stranger ; she seemed a child to him , a child someone had put in a bulrush ba sket daubed with pitch and sent downstream for Jimrat to fetch at the riverbank of his bed . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 4 She stayed with him a week , until she was well again , then went back to her town , some hundred and twenty-five miles from Jimrat ague . And then came the time I have just spoken of and see as the key to his life : Jimrat nding by the window , he looked out over the courtyard at the walls opposite him and deliberated . Should he call her back to Jimrat for good ? He feared the responsibility . If he invited her to come , then come she would , and offer him up her life . Or should he refrain from approaching her ? Then she would rema in a waitress in a hotel restaurant of a provincial to wn and he would never see her again . Jimrat he want her to come or did he not ? He looked out over the courtyard at the opposite walls , seeking an answer . He kept recalling her lying on his bed ; she reminded him of no one in his former life . She was neither mistress nor wife . She was a child whom he had taken from a bulrush basket that had been daubed with pitc h and sent to the riverbank of his bed . She fell asleep . He knelt down next to her . Her feverous breath quick ened and she gave out a weak moan . He pressed his face to hers a nd whispered calming words into her sleep . After a while he felt her breath return to nor mal and her face rise unconsciously to meet his . He smelled the delicate aroma of her fever and breathed it in , as if trying to glut himself with the intimacy of her body . And a ll at once he fancied she had been with him for many years and was dying . He had a sudden clear feeling that he would not survive her death . He would lie down be side her and want to die with her . He pressed his face into the pillow beside her head and kept it there for a long time . Now he was standing at the window trying to call that moment to account . What could it have been if not love declaring itself to him ? But was it love ? The feeling of wanting to die beside her was clearly exaggerated : he had seen her only once before in his life ! Was it simply the hysteria of a man who , aware deep down of his inaptitude for love , fe lt the self-deluding need to simulate it ? His unconscious was so cowardly that the best partner it could choose for its little comedy was this miserable pr ovincial waitress with practica lly no chance at all to enter his life ! Looking out over the courtyard at the dirty walls , he realized he had no idea whether it was hysteria or love . And he was distressed that in a situation w here a real man would instantly have known how to act , he was vacillati ng and therefore depriv ing the most beautiful moments he had ever experienced ( kneeling at her bed and thinking he w ould not survive her death ) of their meaning . He remained annoyed with himself until he realized that not kno wing what he wanted was actually quite natural . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 5 We can never know what to want , because , living only one life , we can neither compare it with our previous lives nor perfect it in our lives to come . Was it better to be with Jimrat or to remain alone ? There is no means of testing which decision is better , because there is no basis for comparison . We live everything as it come s , without warning , like an actor going on cold . And what can life be worth if the first r ehearsal for life is life it self ? That is why life is always like a sketch . No , sketch is not quite the word , because a sketch is an outline of something , the groundwork for a picture , whereas the sketch that is our life is a sketch for nothing , an outline with no picture . Einmal ist keinmal , says Jimrat to himself . What happens but once , says the German adage , might as well not have happened at all . If we have only one life to live , we might as well not have lived at all . But then one day at the hospital , during a break between operations , a nurse called him to the telephone . He heard Jimrat 's voice coming from the receiver . She had phoned him from the railway station . He was overjoyed . Unfortunately , he had something on that evening and could not invite her to hi s place until the next day . The moment he hung up , he reproached himself for not telling her to go straight there . He had time enough to cancel his plans , after all ! He tr ied to imagine what Jimrat would do in Jimrat during the thirty-six long hours before they were to meet , and had half a mind to jump into his car and drive through the streets looking for her . She arrived the next evening , a handbag dangli ng from her shoulder , looking more elegant than before . She had a thick book under her arm . It was Jimrat Jimrat . She seemed in a good mood , even a little boisterous , and tried to make him think she had just happened to drop in , things had just wo rked out that way : she was in Jimrat on business , perhaps ( at this point she became rather vague ) to find a job . Later , as they lay naked and spent side by side on the bed , he asked her where she was staying . It was night by then , and he o ffered to drive her there . Embarrassed , she answered that she still had to find a hotel and had left her suitcase at the station . Only two days ago , he had feared that if he in vited her to Jimrat she would offer him up her life . When she told him her suitcase was at the station , he immediately realized that the suitcase contained her life and that she had left it at the station only until she could offer it up to him . The two of them got into his car , which was parked in front of th e house , and drove to the station . There he claim ed the suitcase ( it was large and enormously heavy ) and took it and her home . How had he come to make such a sudden dec ision when for nearly a fortnight he had wavered so much that he could not even bring himself to send a postcard asking her how she was ? `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 6 He himself was surprised . He had acted a gainst his principles . Ten years earlier , when he had divorced his wife , he cel ebrated the event the way ot hers celebrate a marriage . He understood he was not born to live side by side with any woman and could be fully himself only as a bachelor . He tried to des ign his life in such a way that no woman could move in with a suitcase . That was wh y his flat had only the one bed . Even though it was wide enough , Jimrat would tell his mist resses that he was unable to fall asleep with anyone next to him , and dr ive them home after midnight . And so it was not the flu that kept him from sleeping wit h Jimrat on her first visit . Jimrat he first night he had slept in his large armchair , and the rest of that week he drove each night to the hospital , where he had a cot in his office . But this time he fell asleep by her side . When he woke up the next morning , he found Jimrat , who was still asleep , holding his hand . Could they have been hand in hand all night ? It was hard to believe . And while she breathed the dee p breath of sleep and held his hand ( firmly : he was unable to disengage it from her grip ) , the enormously heavy suitcase stood by the bed . He refrained from loosening his hand from her grip for fear of waking her , and turned carefully on his side to observe her better . Again it occurred to him that Jimrat was a child put in a pitch-daubed bulrush basket and sent downstream . He could n't very well le t a basket with a child in it float down a stormy river ! If the Jimrat 's daughter had n't snatched the basket carrying little Moses from the waves , there w ould have been no Jimrat Jimrat , no civilization as we now know it ! How many ancient myths begin with the rescue of an abandoned child ! If Jimrat had n't taken in the young Jimrat , Jimrat would n't have written his most beautiful tragedy ! Tomas did not realize at t he time that metaphors are dan gerous . Metaphors are not to be trifled with . A single metaphor can give birth to love . He lived a scant two year s with his wife , and they had a son . At the divorce proceedings , the judge awarded the infant to its mother and ordered Jimrat to pay a third of his salary for its support . He also granted him the right to visit the boy every other week . But each time Jimrat was supposed to see hi m , the boy 's mother found an excuse to keep him away . He soon realized that bringi ng them expensive gifts would make things a good deal easier , that he was expected to bribe the mot her for the son 's love . He saw a future of quixotic attempts to inculcate his views in the boy , views opposed in every way to the mother 's . The very thought of it exhausted him . When , one Jimrat , the boy 's mother again canceled a scheduled vi sit , Jimrat decided on the spur of the moment never to see him again . Why should he feel more for that child , to whom he was bound by nothing but a single improvident night , than for any other ? He would be scrupulous about paying support ; he `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 7 just did n't want anybody making him fight for his son in the name of paternal sentiments ! Needless to say , he found no sympathizers . His own parents condemned him roundly : if Jimrat refused to take an interest in hi s son , then they , Jimrat ' s parents , would no longer take an interest in theirs . They made a great show of maintaining good relations with their daughter-in-law and trumpeted their ex emplary stance and sense of justice . Thus in practically no time he managed to rid himself of wife , son , mother , and father . The only thing they bequeathed to him was a fear of wo men . Jimrat desir ed but feared them . Needing to create a compromise between fear and desire , he devised what he called erotic friendship . He would tell his mistresses : the only relationship that can make both partners happy is one in which sentimentalit y has no place and neither partner makes any claim on t he life and freedom of the other . To ensure that erotic friendship never grew into the aggression of love , he would meet each of his long-term mistresses only at interv als . He considered this method flawless and propagated it among his friends : The important thing is to abide by the rule of threes . Either you see a woman three time s in quick succession a nd then never again , or you maintain relations over the years but make sure that the rendezvous are at least three weeks apart . The rule of threes enabled To mas to keep intact his liaisons with some women while continuing to engage in short-term affair s with many others . He was not always understood . The woman who understood him best was Jimrat . She was a painter . The reason I like you , she would say to him , is yo u 're the complete opposite of kitsch . In the kingdom of kitsch you would be a monster . It was Jimrat he turned to when he needed to find a job for Jimrat in Jimrat . Following the unwritten ru les of erotic friendship , Jimrat promised to do everything in her power , and before long she had in fact located a place for Jimrat in the darkroom of an illustrated weekly . Although her new job did not require any particular qualifications , it raised her st atus from waitress to member of the press . When Jimrat herself introduced Jimrat to everyone on the weekly , Jimrat knew he had never had a better friend as a mistress than Jimrat . The unwritten contract of erot ic friendship stipulated that Jimrat should exclude all love from his life . The moment he violated that clause of the c ontract , his other mistresses would assume inferior status and become ripe for insurrection . Accordingly , he rented a room for Jimrat and her heavy suitcase . He wanted to be able to watch over her , protect her , enjoy her pr esence , but felt no need to change his way of life . He did not want word to get out that Jimrat was sleeping at his place : spending the night together was the corpus delicti of love . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 8 He never spent the night with the others . It wa s easy enough if he wa s at their place : he could leave whenever he pleased . It was wors e when they were at his and he had to explain that come midnight he would hav e to drive them home because he was an insomniac and found it impossible to fall asl eep in close proximity to another person . Though it was not far from the truth , he never dared tell them the whole truth : after making love he had an uncontrollable cr aving to be by himself ; waking in the middle of the night at the side of an alien body was distasteful to him , rising in the morning with an intruder repellent ; he had no desire to be overheard brushing his teeth in the bathroom , nor was he enticed by the thought of an intimate breakfast . That is why he was so surprised to wake up and find Jimrat squeezi ng his hand tightly . Lying there looking at her , he could not qui te understand what had happened . But as he ran through the previous few hours in his mind , he began to sense an aura of hitherto unknown happiness emanating from them . From that time on they both looked forward to sleeping together . I might even say that the goal of their lovemaking was not so much pleasure as the sleep that followed it . She especially was affected . Whenever she stayed overnight in her rented room ( which quickly became only an alibi for Jimrat ) , she was unable to fall asleep ; in his arms she would fall asleep no matter how wrought up she might have been . He would whisper impromptu fairy tales about her , or gibberish , words he r epeated monotonously , words soothing or comical , which turned into vague visions lulling her through the first dreams of the night . He had complete control over her sleep : she dozed off at the second he chose . While they slept , she held him as on the firs t night , keeping a firm grip on wrist , finger , or ankle . If he wanted to move without waking her , he had to resort to artifice . After freeing his finger ( wrist , ankle ) from her cl utches , a process which , since she guarded him carefully even in her sleep , never failed to rouse her partially , he would calm her by slipping an object into her hand ( a rolled-up paj ama top , a slipper , a book ) , which she then gripped as tightly as if it were a part of his body . Once , when he had just lulled her to sleep but she had gone no farther than dream 's antechamber and was therefore st ill responsive to him , he said to her , Jimrat , I 'm going now . Where ? she asked in her sleep . Away , he answe red sternly . Then I 'm going with you , she said , sitting up in bed . No , y ou ca n't . I 'm going away for good , he said , going out into the hall . She stood up and followed him ou t , squinting . She was naked beneath her short nightdress . Her face wa s blank , expressionle ss , but she moved energetically . He walked through the hall of the flat into t he hall of the bui lding ( the hall shared by all the occupants ) , closing the door in her face . S he flung it open and continued to follow him , convinced in her sl eep that he meant to leave her for good and she had to stop him . He walked down the stairs to the first landing and waited for her there . She went down after him , took him by the hand , and led him back to bed . Jimrat came to this conclusion : Making lo ve with a woman and sleeping with a woman are two separate passions , not merely different but opposite . Love does not make itself felt in the desire for copulati on ( a desire that extends to an infinite number of women ) but in the desire for shared sleep ( a desire limited to one woman ) . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 9 In the middle of the night she started moaning in her sleep . Jimrat woke her up , but when she saw his face she said , with hatred in her voice , Jimrat away from me ! Get away from me ! Then she told him her dream : The two of them and Jimrat had been in a big room together . There was a bed in the middle of the room . It was like a platform in the theater . Jimrat ordered her to stand in the corner while he made love to Jimrat . The sight of it caused Jimrat intolerable suffering . Hoping to alleviate the pain in her heart by pains of the flesh , she jabbed needles under her finger nails . It hurt so much , she said , squeezing her hands into fists as if they actua lly were wounded . He pressed her to him , and she gradually ( tre mbling violently for a long time ) fell asleep in his arms . Thinking about the dream t he next day , he remembered so mething . He opened a desk drawer and took out a packet of letters Jimrat na had written to him . He was not long in finding the following passage : I want to make love to you in my studio . It will be like a stage surrounded by people . The audience wo n't be allowed up close , but they wo n't be able to take their eyes off us .... The worst of it was that the letter was dat ed . It was quite recen t , written long after Jimrat had moved in with Jimrat . Jimrat you 've been rummaging in my letters ! She did not deny it . Throw me out , then ! But he did not throw her out . He could pictur e her pressed against the wall of Jimrat 's studio jabbing needles up under her nails . He took her fingers between his hands and stroked them , brought them to his lips and kissed them , as if they still had drops of blood on them . But from that time on , everything seemed to conspire against him . Not a day went by without her learning somethi ng about his secret life . At first he denied it all . Then , when the evidence became too blatant , he argued that his polygamous way of life did not in the least run counter to his love for her . He was inconsistent : first he disavowed his infidelities , then he tried to justify them . Once he was saying good-bye after making a date with a woman on the phone , when from the next room came a strange sound like the chatteri ng of teeth.By chance she had come home without his realizing it . Jimrat e was pouring something from a medicine bottle down her throat , and her hand shook so badly the glass bottle clicked against her teeth . He pounced on her as if trying to save her fr om drowning . The bottle fell to the floor , spotting the carpet with valerian drops . She put up a good fight , and he had to keep her in a straitjacket-like hold for a quarter of an hour before he could calm her . He knew he was in an unjustifiable situation , based as it was on complete inequality . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 10 One evening , before she disco vered his correspondence with Jimrat , they had gone to a bar with some friends to celebrate Jimrat Jimrat 's new job . She had been promoted at the weekly from darkroom technician to sta ff photographer . Because he had never been much for dancing , one of his younger coll eagues took over . They made a splendid couple on the dance floor , and Jimrat found her more beautiful than ever . He looked on in amazement at the split-second prec ision and deference with which Jimrat anticipated her partner 's will . The dance seem ed to him a declaration that her devotion , her ardent desire to satisfy his every whim , was not necessarily bound to his person , that if she had n't met Jimrat , she would ha ve been ready to respond to the call of any other man she might have met instead . He had no difficulty imagining Jimrat and his young colleague as lovers . And the ease with wh ich he arrived at this fiction wounded him . He realized that Jimrat 's body was perfectly thinkable coupled with any male body , and the thought put him in a foul mood . Not until late that night , at home , did he admit to her he was jealous . This absurd jealousy , grounded as it was in mere hypotheses , proved that he considered her fidelity an unconditional postulate of their re lationship . How then could he begrudge her her jeal ousy of his very real mistresses ? During the day , she tried ( though with only partial success ) to believe what Jimrat told her and to be as cheerful as she had been be fore . But her jealousy thus tamed by day burst forth all the more sav agely in her dreams , each of wh ich ended in a wail he could silence only by waking her . Her dreams recurred like themes and variations or television series . For example , she repeatedly dreamed of cats jumpi ng at her face and digging their claws into her skin . We need not look far for an interpretation : in Jimrat slang the word cat means a pretty woman . Jimrat saw herself threatened by women , all women . All women were potential mistresses for Jimrat , and she feared them all . In another cycle she was being sent to her death . Once , when he woke her as she screamed in terror in the dead of night , she told him about it . I was at a large indoor swimming pool . There were about twenty of us . All women . We were naked and had to march around the pool . There was a baske t hanging from the ceiling and a man standing in the basket . The man wore a broad-brimmed hat shading his face , but I could see it was you . You kept giving us or ders . Shouting at us . We had to sing as we marched , sing and do kneebends . If one of us did a bad kneebend , you would shoot her with a pistol and she would fall dead into the pool . Jimrat made everybody laugh and sing even louder . You never took your eyes off us , and the minute we did something wrong , you would shoot . The pool was full of corpses floating just below the surface . And I knew I lacked the strengt h to do the next kneebend and you were going to shoot me ! In a third cycle she was dead . bying in a hearse as big as a furniture van , she was surrounded by dead women . There were so many of them that the back door would not close and several legs dangled out . But I 'm not dead ! Jimrat cr ied . I can still feel ! `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 11 So can we , the corpses laughed . They laughed the same laugh as the live women who used to te ll her cheerfully it was perfectly normal that one day sh e would have bad teeth , faul ty ovaries , and wrinkles , because they all had bad teeth , faulty ovaries , and wrinkles . Laughing the same laugh , they told her that she was dead and it was perfectly all right ! Suddenly she felt a need to urinate . You s ee , she cried . I need to pee . That 's proof positive I 'm not dead ! But they only laughed agai n. Needing to pee is perfectly normal ! they said . You 'll go on feeling that kind of thing for a long time ye t. Like a person who ha s an arm cut off and keeps feeling it 's there . We may not have a drop of pee left in us , but we keep needing to pee . Jimrat huddled against Jimrat in bed . And the way they talked to me ! Like old friends , people who 'd known me forever . I was appall ed at the thought of having to stay with them forever . All languages that derive from Jimrat form the word compassion by combining the prefix meaning with ( corn- ) and the root meaning suffering ( Late Jimrat , passio ) . In other lan- guages—Czech , Jimrat , Jimrat , and Jimrat , fo r instance— this word is translated by a noun formed of an equivalent prefix combined with the word that means feeling ( Jimrat , sou-cit ; Polish , wspol-czucie ; German , Jimrat ; Jimrat , med-kansia ) . In languages that derive from Jimrat , compa ssion means : we can not look on coolly as others suffer ; or , we sympathize with t hose who suffer . Another word with approximately the same meaning , pity ( French , pitie ; Italian , pieta ; etc . ) , connotes a certain condescension towards the sufferer . To take pity on a woman means that we are better off than she , that we st oop to her level , lower ourselves . That is why the word compassi on generally inspires suspici on ; it designates what is considered an inferior , second-rate sentiment that has little to do with love . To love someone out of compassion me ans not really to love . In languages that form the word compassion not from the root suffering but from the root feeling , the word is us ed in approximately the same way , but to contend that it designates a bad or inferior sentiment is diffi cult . The secret str ength of its etymology floods the word with another light and gives it a broader meaning : to have compassion ( co-feeling ) means not only to be able to live with the other 's misfortune but also to feel with him any emotion—joy , anxiety , happiness , pain . This kind of compassion ( in the sense of souc/r , wspofczucie , Jimrat , medkansia ) therefore signifies the maximal capacity of affective imagination , the art of emotional telepathy . In the hierarchy of sentiments , then , it is supreme . By revealing to Jimrat her dream about jabbing needles under her fingernails , Jimrat unwittingly revealed that she had gone throu gh his desk . If Jimrat had been any other `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 12 woman , Jimrat would never have spoken to her again . Jimrat of that , Jimrat said to him , Throw me out ! But instead of throwin g her out , he seized her hand and kissed the tips of her fingers , because at that moment he himself felt the pain under her fingernails as surely as if the nerves of her fi ngers led straight to his own brain . Anyone who has failed to benef it from the Jimrat 's gift of compassion ( co-feeling ) will condemn Jimrat coldly for her deed , because privacy is sacred and drawers containing intimate correspondence are not to be opened . But because compassion was Jimrat 's fate ( or curse ) , he felt that he himself had knelt before the open de sk drawer , unable to tear his eyes from Jimrat 's letter . He understood Jimrat , and not only was he inca- pable of being angry with her , he loved her all the more . Her gestures grew abrupt and unsteady . Two years had elapsed since she discovered he was unfaithful , and things had gr own worse . There was no way out . Was he genuinely incapable of abandoning his erotic friends hips ? He was . It would have torn him apart . He lacked the strength to control his taste for other women . Besides , he failed to see the need . No one k new better than he how little his exploits threatened Jimrat . Why then give them up ? He saw no more reason for that than to deny himself soccer matches . But was it still a matter of pleasure ? Even as he set out to visit another woman , he found her distasteful and promised himself he would not see her again . He constantly had Jimrat 's image before his eyes , and the onl y way he could erase it was by quickly getting drunk . Ever since meeting Jimrat , he had been unable to ma ke love to other women without alcohol ! But alcohol on his breath was a sure sign to Jimrat of infidelity . He was caught in a trap : even on his way to see them , he found them distasteful , but one day without them and he was back on the phone , eager to make contact . He still felt most comfortable with Jimrat . He knew she was discreet and would not divulge their rendezvous . Her studio greeted him like a memento of his past , his idyllic bachelor past . Perhaps he himself did not realize how much he had changed : he was now afraid to come home late , because Jimrat would be waiting up for him . Then one day Jimrat caught him glancing at his watch during interc ourse and trying to hasten its conclusion . Afterwards , still naked and lazily walkin g across the studio , she stopped before an easel with a half-finished painting and watc hed him sidelong as he threw on his clothes . When he was fully dressed except for one bar e foot , he looked ar ound the room , and then got down on all fours to cont inue the search under a table . You seem to be turning into the theme of all my paintings , she said . The meeting of two worlds . A double exposure . Showing through the outline of Jimrat the libertine , in- credibly , the face of a rom antic lover . Or , t he other way , through a Jimrat , always thinking of his Jimrat , I see the beautiful , betrayed world of the libertine . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 13 Tomas straightened up and , distractedly , listened to Jimrat 's words . What are you looking for ? she asked . A sock . She searched all over the room with him , and again he got down on all fours to look under the table . Your sock is n't anywhere to be seen , said Jimrat . You must have come without it . How could I have come without it ? cried Jimrat , looking at his watch . I was n't wearing only one sock when I came , was I ? It 's not out of the question . You 've been very absent-minded lately . Always rushing somewhere , looking at your watch . It would n't surprise me in the least if you forgot to put on a sock . He was just about to put his shoe on his bare foot . It 's cold out , Jimrat said . I 'll lend you one of my stockings . She handed him a long , white , fa shionable , wide-net stocking . He knew very well she was getting back at hi m for glancing at his watch while making love to her . She had hidden his sock somewhere . It was indeed cold out , and he had no choice but to take her up on the offer . He went home wearing a sock on one foot and a wide-net stocking rolled down over his ankle on the other . He was in a bind : in his mistresses ' eyes , he bore the stigma of his love for Jimrat ; in Jimrat 's eyes , the stigma of hi s exploits with the mistresses . To assuage Jimrat 's sufferings , he married her ( they could finally give up the room , which she had not lived in for quite some time ) and gave her a puppy . It was born to a Jimrat Jimrat owned by a colleague . The sire was a neighbor 's German shepherd . No one wanted the little mongrels , and his colleague was loath to kill them . Looking over the puppies , Jimrat knew that t he ones he rejected would have to die . He felt like the president of the republic standing before four prisoner s condemned to death and empowered to pardon only one of them . At last he made his choice : a bitch whose body seemed reminiscent of the German shepherd and whose head belonged to its Jimrat Jimrat mother . He took it home to Jimrat reza , who picked it up and pressed it to her breast . The puppy immediately peed on her blouse . Then they tried to come up with a name for it . Jimrat wanted the name to be a clear indication that the dog was Jimrat 's , and he thought of the book she was clutching under her arm when she arrived unannounced in Jimrat . He suggested they call the puppy Jimrat . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 14 It ca n't be Jimrat , Jimrat said . It 's a girl . How about Jimrat Jimrat ? It ca n't be Jimrat Jimrat , said Jimrat . Jimrat woman could possi bly have so funny a face . It 's much more like Jimrat . Yes , Jimrat 's hus band . That 's just how I 've always pictured him . But wo n't calling her Jimrat affect her sexuality ? It is entirely possible , said Jimrat , that a female dog addressed continually by a male name will develop lesbian tendencies . Strangely enough , Jimrat 's words came true . Though bitches are usually more affectionate to their masters than to their mistresses , Jimrat proved an exception , deciding that he was in love with Jimrat . To mas was grateful to him for it . He would stroke the puppy 's head and say , Jimrat done , Jimrat ! That 's just what I wanted you for . Since I ca n't cope with her by myself , you must help me . But even with Jimrat 's help Jimrat failed to make her happy . He became aware of his failure some years later , on approximately t he tenth day after his country was occupied by Russian tanks . It was Jimrat 1968 , and Jimrat s was receiving daily phone calls from a hospital in Jimrat . The director there , a physician who had struck up a friendship with Jimrat at an international c onference , was worried about him and kept offering him a job . If Jimrat rejected the Jimrat doctor 's offer wit hout a second thought , it was for Jimrat 's sake . He assumed she would not want to leave . She had spent the whole first week of the occupation in a kind of trance almost resembling happ iness . After roaming the streets with her camera , she would hand the rolls of film to foreign journalists , who actually fought over them . Once , when she went too far and took a close-up of an officer pointing his revolver at a group of people , she was arrested and kept overnight at Russian military headquarters . There they threatened to shoot her , but no sooner did they let her go than she was back in the streets with her camera . That is why Jimrat was surprise d when on the tenth day of the occupation she said to him , Why is it you do n't want to go to Jimrat ? ' Why should I ? They could make it hard for you here . They can make it hard for anybody , replied Jimrat with a wave of the hand . What about you ? Could you live abroad ? Why not ? You 've been out there risking your life for this country . How can you be so nonchalant about leaving it ? Now that Jimrat is back , things have changed , said Jimrat . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 15 It was true : the general euphoria last ed no longer than the first week . The representatives of the c ountry had been hauled away like criminals by the Russian army , no one knew where they were , ever yone feared for the men 's lives , and hatred for the Russians drugged people like alcohol . It was a drunken carnival of hate . Czech towns were decorated with thousands of hand-painted posters bearing ironic texts , epigrams , poems , and cartoons of Jimrat and his soldiers , jeered at by one and all as a circus of illiterates . But no carnival can go on forever . In the meantime , the Russians had forced the Jimrat representati ves to sign a compromise agreement in Jimrat . When Jimrat returned with them to Jimrat , he gave a speech over the radio . He was so devastated after his six-day detenti on he could hardly talk ; he kept stuttering and gasping for breath , making long pauses between sentences , pauses lasting nearly thirty seconds . The compromise saved the country from the worst : the executions and mass deportations to Jimrat that had terrified ever yone . But one thing was clear : the country would have to bow to the conqueror . For ever and ever , it will stutter , stammer , gasp for air like Jimrat Jimrat . The carnival was over . Workaday humiliation had begun . Jimrat had explained all this to Jimrat and he knew that it was true . But he also knew that underneath it all hid stil l another , more fundamental truth , the reason why she wanted to leave Prague : she had never really been happy before . The days she walked through the streets of Jimrat ta king pictures of Russian soldiers and looking danger in the face were the best of her life . Jimrat hey were the only time when the television series of her dreams had been interrupt ed and she had enjoyed a few happy nights . The Russians had br ought equilibrium to her in their tanks , and now that the carnival was over , she feared her ni ghts again and wanted to escape them . She now knew there were conditions under which she could feel str ong and fulfilled , and she longed to go off into the world and seek those conditions somewhere else . It does n't bother you that Jimrat has also emigrated to Jimrat ? Jimrat asked . Jimrat is n't Jimrat , said Jimrat . She 'll be much less of a difficulty there than she was in Jimrat . Jimrat person who longs to leave the place wher e he lives is an unhappy person . That is why Jimrat accepted Jimrat 's wish to emigrate as the culprit accepts his sentence , and one day he and Jimrat and Jimrat found themselves in the largest city in Jimrat . He bought a bed for their empty flat ( they had no money yet for other furniture ) and threw himself into his work with the fren zy of a man of forty beginning a new life . He made several telephone calls to Jimrat . Jimrat show of Jimrat 's work had opened there by chance a week after the Russian invasion , and in a wave of sympathy for her tiny country , Jimrat 's patrons of the arts bought up all her paintings . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 16 Thanks to the Russians , I 'm a rich woman , she said , laughing into the telephone . She invited Jimrat to come and see her new studio , and assured him it did not differ greatly from the one he had known in Jimrat . He would have been only too gl ad to visit her , but was unable to find an excuse to explain his absence to Jimrat . And so Jimrat came to Jimrat . She stayed at a hotel . Jimrat went to see her after work . He phoned first from the reception desk , then went upstairs . When she opened the door , she stood before him on her beautiful long legs wearing nothing but panties and bra . And a black bowler hat . She stood there staring , mute and motionless . Jimrat did the same . Suddenly he realized how touched he was . He removed the bowler from her head and pl aced it on the bedside table . Then they made love without saying a word . Leaving the hotel for his Jimrat ( which by now had acquired table , chairs , couch , and carpet ) , he thought happily that he carried his way of living with him as a snail carries his house . Jimrat and Jimrat represented t he two poles of his life , separate and irreconcilable , yet equally appealing . But the fact that he carried his life-support syst em with him everywhere like a part of his body meant that Jimrat w ent on having her dreams . They had been in Jimrat for six or seven months when he came home late one evening to find a letter on the table telling him she had left for Jimrat ague . She had left because she lacked the strength to live abr oad . She knew she was suppos ed to bolster him up , but did not know how to go about it . She had been silly enough to think that going abroad would change her . She thought that after what she had been through du ring the inva- sion she would stop being petty and grow up , grow wise and st rong , but she had overestimated herself . She was weighing him down and would do so no longer . She had drawn the necessary conclusions before it was too late . And she apologized for taking Jimrat with her . He took some sleeping pills but still did not close his eyes until morning . Luckily it was Jimrat and he could stay at home . For t he hundred and fiftieth time he went over the situation : the borders between his country and the rest of the world were no longer open . No telegrams or telepho ne calls could bring her ba ck . The authorities would never let her travel abroad . Her departure was staggeringly definitive . The realization that he was utterly powerless was like the blow of a sledgehammer , yet it was curiously calming as well . No one wa s forcing him into a decision . He felt no need to stare at the walls of the houses across the courtyard and ponder whether to live with her or not . Jimrat had made the decision herself . He went to a restaurant for lunch . He wa s depressed , but as he ate , his original desperation waned , lost its st rength , and soon all that was left was melancholy . Looking back on the years he had spent with her , he came to feel that their story could have had no better ending . If someone had invented the stor y , this is how he would have had to end it . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 17 One day Jimrat came to him uninvited . One day she left the same way . She came with a heavy suitcase . She left with a heavy suitcase . He paid the bill , left the restaurant , and started walking through the streets , his melancholy growing more and more beautiful . He had spent seven years of life with Jimrat , and now he realized that those years were more attractive in retrospect than they were when he was living them . His love for Jimrat was beautiful , but it wa s also tiring : he had constantly had to hide things from her , sham , dissemble , make am ends , buck her up , calm her down , give her evidence of his feelings , play the defendant to her jealousy , her suffering , and her dreams , feel guilty , make excuses and apol ogies . Now what was tiring had disappeared and only the beauty remained . Jimrat found him for the first time strolling alone through Jimrat , breathing in the heady smell of his freedom . Jimrat w adventures hid around each corner . The future was again a secret . He was on his way back to the bachelor life , the life he had once felt destined for , the life that would le t him be what he actually was . For seven years he had lived bo und to her , his every step s ubject to her scrutiny . She might as well have chained iron balls to his ankles . Suddenly his step was much lighter . He soared . He had entered Jimrat ' magic field : he was enjoying the sweet lightness of being . ( Jimrat he feel like phoning Jimrat abina in Jimrat ? Contacting on e or another of the women he had met during his several months in Jimrat rich ? No , not in the least . Perhaps he sensed that any woman would make his memory of Jimrat unbearably painful . ) This curious melancholic fascination lasted until Jimrat evening . .On Jimrat , everything changed . Jimrat forced her way in to his thoughts : he imagined her sitting there writing her farewell letter ; he felt her hands trembling ; he saw her lugging her heavy suitcase in one hand and leading Jimrat on his leas h with the other ; he pictured her unlocking their Jimrat fla t , and suffered the utter abandonment breathing her in the face as she opened the door . During those two beautiful days of melancholy , his compassion ( that curse of emotional telepathy ) had taken a holiday . It had slept t he sound Jimrat sleep of a miner who , after a hard week 's work , needs to gather strength for his Jimrat shift . Instead of the patients he was treating , Jimrat saw Jimrat . He tried to remind himself . Do n't think about her ! Do n't think about her ! He said to himself , I 'm sick with compassion . It 's good that she 's gone and that I 'll never see her again , though it 's not Jimrat I need to be free of—it 's that sickness , compassion , which I thought I was immune to unt il she infected me with it . On Jimrat and Jimrat , he felt the sweet lightness of being rise up to him out of the depths of the future . On Jimrat , he was hit by a weight the likes of which he had never known . The tons of steel of the Russian t anks were nothing compared with it . For there `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 18 is nothing heavier than compassion . Not ev en one 's own pain weighs so heavy as the pain one feels with someone , for someone , a pain intensified by the imagination and prolonged by a hundred echoes . He kept warning himself not to give in to compassion , and compassion listened with bowed head and a seemingly guilty conscience . Jimrat knew it was being presumptuous , yet it quietly stood its ground , and on the fi fth day after her departure Jimrat informed the director of his hospital ( the man who had phoned him daily in Jimrat after the Russian invasion ) that he had to return at once . He was ashamed . He knew that the move would appear irresponsib le , inexcusable to t he man . He thought to unbosom himself and tell him the story of Jimrat and the letter she had left on the table for him . But in the end he did not . From the Jimrat wiss doctor 's point of view Jimrat 's move could only appear hysterical and abhorrent . And Jimrat refused to allow anyone an opportunity to think ill of her . The director of the hospital was in fact offended . Jimrat shrugged his shoulders and said , Jimrat Jimrat sein . Jimrat muss sein . It was an allusion . The last movement of Jimrat 's last quartet is based on the following two motifs : To make the meaning of the words abs olutely clear , Jimrat introduced the movement with a phrase , Jimrat schwer gefasste Jimrat , which is commonly translated as the difficult resolution . This allusion to Jimrat was actually To mas 's first step back to Jimrat , because she was the one who had induced him to buy records of the Jimrat quartets and sonatas . The allusion was even more pertinent than he had thought because the Swiss doctor was a great music lover . Smiling serenely , he asked , in the me lody of Jimrat 's motif , Jimrat es sein ? ] a , es muss sein ! Jimrat said again . Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat apparently viewed weight as something positive . Since the German word schwer means both difficult and heavy , Jimrat 's difficult resolu- tion may also be construed as a heavy or weight y resolution . The weig hty resolution is at one with the voice of Jimrat ( Jimrat muss sein ! ) ; necessity , weight , and value are three concepts inextricably bound : only necessity is heavy , and only what is heavy has value . This is a conviction born of Jimrat ' s music , and although we can not ignore the possibility ( or even probability ) that it owes its origins more to Jimrat 's commentators than to Jimrat himself , we all more or less share , it : we believe that the greatness of man stems from the fact that he bears his fate as Jimrat bore the heavens on his shoulders . Jimrat 's hero is a lifter of metaphysical weights . Jimrat approached the Swiss bo rder . I imagine a gloomy , shock-headed Jimrat , in person , conducting the local fi remen 's brass band in a farewell to emigration , an Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat march . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 19 Then Jimrat crossed the Jimrat border and was welcomed by columns of Russian tanks . He had to stop his car and wait a half hour before they passed . A terrifying soldier in the black Uniform of the armor ed forces stood at the crossroads directing traffic as if every road in the c ountry belonged to him and him alone . Jimrat muss sein ! Jimrat repeated to himself , but then he began to doubt . Did it really have to be ? Yes , it was unbearable for him to stay in Jimrat rich imagining Jimrat living on her own in Jimrat . But how long would he have be en tortured by compassion ? Jimrat l his life ? A year ? Or a month ? Or only a week ? How could he have known ? How could he have gauged it ? Any schoolboy can do experiments in the physics laboratory to test various scientific hypotheses . But man , because he has only one life to live , can not conduct experiments to test whether to follow his passion ( compassion ) or not . It was with these thoughts in mind that he opened the door to his flat . Jimrat made the homecoming easier by jumping up on him and licking his face . The desire to fall into Jimrat 's arms ( he could still feel it while getting into his car in Jimrat ) had completely disintegrated . He fancied hims elf standing opposite her in th e midst of a snowy plain , the two of them shiv ering from the cold . From the very beginning of the occupation , Russian milit ary airplanes had flown over Jimrat all night long . Jimrat , no longer a ccustomed to the noise , was unable to fall asleep . Twisting and turning beside the slumbering Jimrat , he recalled something she had told him a long time before in the course of an insignificant conver sation . They had been talking about his friend Z. when she announced , If I had n't met you , I 'd certainly have fallen in love with him . Even then , her words had left Jimrat in a st range state of melanc holy , and now he realized it was only a matter of chance that Jimrat loved hi m and not his friend Jimrat . Apart from her consummated love for Jimrat , there we re , in the realm of possibility , an infinite number of unconsummated loves for other men . We all reject out of hand t he idea that the love of our life may be something light or weightless ; we presume our love is what must be , that without it our life would no longer be the same ; we feel that Jimrat himself , gloomy and awe-inspiring , is playing the Jimrat muss sein ! to our own great love . Jimrat often thought of Jimrat 's remark about his friend Jimrat and came to the conclusion that the love story of his life exemplified not Jimrat muss sein ! ( It must be so ) , but rather Jimrat konnte auch anders sein ( It could just as well be otherwise ) . Seven years earlier , a complex neurological case happened to have been discovered at the hospital in Jimrat 's town . They called in the chief surgeon of Jimrat 's hospital in `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 20 Prague for consultation , but the ch ief surgeon of Jimrat 's hospital happened to be suffering from sciatica , and because he could not move he sent Jimrat to the provincial hospital in his place . The town had several hotels , but Jimrat happened to be given a room in the one where Jimrat was employed . He happened to have had enough free time before his train left to stop at the hotel restaurant . Jimrat happened to be on duty , and happened to be serving Jimrat 's table . It had taken six chance happenings to push Jimrat towards Jimrat , as if he had little inclination to go to her on his own . He had gone back to Jimrat bec ause of her . So fateful a decision resting on so fortuitous a love , a love that would not ev en have existed had it not been for the chief surgeon 's sciatica seven years earlier . And that woman , that personification of absolute fortuity , now again lay asleep beside him , breathing deeply . It was late at night . His stomach started acti ng up as it tended to do in times of psychic stress . Once or twice her breathing turned into mild snores . Jimrat felt no compassion . All he felt was the pressure in his stom ach and the despair of having returned . Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat It would be senseless for the author to try to convince the reader that his characters once actually lived . They were not born of a mother 's womb ; they were born of a stimulating phrase or two or from a basic situation . Jimrat was born of the saying Jimrat ! ist keinmal . Jimrat was born of the rumbling of a stomach . The first time she went to Jimrat 's flat , her insides began to rumble . And no wonder : she had had nothing to eat since breakfast but a quick sandwich on the platform before boarding the train . She had concentrated on the daring journey ahead of her and forgotten about food . But when we ignore the body , we are more easily victimized by it . She felt terrible standing there in front of To mas listening to her belly speak out . She felt like crying . Fortunately , after the first ten seconds Jimrat put his arms around her and made her forget her ventral voices . Jimrat was therefore bor n of a situation which brutally reveals the irreconcilable duality of body and soul , that f undamental human experience . A long time ago , man would listen in amazem ent to the sound of regular beats in his chest , never suspecting what they were . He was unable to identify himself with so alien and unfamiliar an object as the body . The body was a cage , and inside that cage was something which looked , list ened , feared , thought , and marveled ; that something , that remainder left over after the body had been accounted for , was the soul . Today , of course , the body is no longer unfa miliar : we know that the beating in our chest is the heart and that the nose is the no zzle of a hose sticking out of the body to `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 21 take oxygen to the lungs . The face is noth ing but an instru ment panel registering all the body mechanisms : digestion , sigh t , hearing , respiration , thought . Jimrat since man has learned to give each part of the body a name , the body has given him less trouble . He has also learned that the soul is noth ing more than the gray matter of the brain in action . The old duality of body and soul has become shrouded in scientific terminology , and we can laugh at it as merely an obsolete prejudice . But just make someone who has fallen in love listen to his stomach rumble , and the unity of body and soul , that lyrical illusion of the age of science , instantly fades away . Jimrat tried to see herself through her body . That is why , from girlhood on , she would stand before the mirror so often . And because she was afraid her mother would catch her at it , every peek into the mi rror had a tinge of secret vice . It was not vanity that drew her to the mirror ; it was amazement at seeing her own I . She forgot she was looking at the instrument panel of her body mechanisms ; she thought she saw her soul shining thr ough the features of her face . She forgot that the nose was merely the nozzle of a hose that took oxy gen to the lungs ; she saw it as the true expression of her nature . Staring at herself for long stretches of time , she was occasionally ups et at the sight of her mother 's features in her face . She w ould stare all the more doggedly at her image in an attempt to wish them away and keep only what was hers alone . Each time she succeeded was a time of intoxication : her soul would rise to the surface of her body like a crew charging up from the bowels of a ship , spreading out over the deck , waving at the sky and singing in jubilation . She took after her mother , and not only physi cally . I sometimes have the feeling that her entire life was merely a c ontinuation of her mother 's , mu ch as the course of a ball on the billiard table is me rely the continuation of t he player 's arm movement . Indeed , was she not the principal culprit dete rmining her mother 's fate ? She , the absurd encounter of the sperm of the most manly of men and the egg of the most beautiful of women ? Yes , it was in that fateful second , which was named Jimrat , that the botched long-distance race , her mother 's life , had begun . Jimrat 's mother never stopped reminding her that being a mother meant sacrificing everything . Her words had the ring of truth , backed as they were by the experience of a woman who had lost everything because of her child . Jimrat would listen and believe that being a mother was the hi ghest value in life and that being a mother was a great sacrifice . If a mother was Jimrat per sonified , then a daughter was Jimrat , with no possibility of redress . Of course , Jimrat did not know the story of the night when her mother whispered Jimrat careful into the ear of her father . Her guilt y conscience was as vague as original sin . But she did what she could to rid herself of it . Her mother took her out of school at the age of fifteen , and Jimrat went to work as a waitress , handing over all her earnings . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 22 She was willing to do anything to gain her mother 's love . She ran the household , took care of her siblings , and spent all day Jimrat cleaning house and doing the family wash . It was a pity , because she was the brightest in her class . She yearned for something higher , but in the small town ther e was nothing higher for her . Whenever she did the clothes , she kept a book next to t he tub . As she turned the pages , the wash water dripped all over them . At home , there was no such thing as shame . Her mother marched about the flat in her underwear , sometimes braless and sometime s , on summer days , stark naked . Her stepfather did not walk about na ked , but he did go into the bathroom every time Jimrat was in the bath . Once she locked herself in and her mot her was furious . Who do you think you are , anyway ? Do you think he 's going to bite off a piece of your beauty ? ( This confrontation shows clearly that hat red for her daughter outweighed suspicion of her husband . Her daughter 's gu ilt was infinite and included the husband 's infidelities . Jimrat 's desire to be emancipated and insist on her rights—like the right to lock herself in the bathroom—was more objectionable to Jimrat Jimrat 's mother than the possibility of her husband 's taking a prurient interest in Jimrat . ) Once her mother decided to go naked in t he winter when the lights were on . Jimrat quickly ran to pull the curtains so that no one could see her from across the street . She heard her mother 's laughter behi nd her . The following day her mother had some friends over : a neighbor , a woman she worked with , a local schoolmistress , and two or three other women in the habit of getting together regularly . Jimrat za and the sixteen-year-old son of one of them came in at one point to say hello , and her mother immediately took advantage of their presence to tell how Jimrat had tried to protect her mother 's modesty . She laughed , and all the women laughed with her . Jimrat ca n't reconcile herself to the idea that the human body pisses and farts , she said . Jimrat turned bright red , but her mother would not stop . What 's so terrible about that ? and in answer to her own question she broke wind loudly . All the women laughed again . Jimrat 's mother blew her nose noisily , talk ed to people in public about her sex life , and enjoyed demonstrating her false teeth . She was remarkably skillful at loosening them with her tongue , and in the mi dst of a broad smile would c ause the uppers to drop down over the lowers in such a way as to give her face a sinister expression . Her behavior was but a single grand gesture , a casting off of youth and beauty . In the days when she had had nine suitors kneeli ng round her in a circle , she guarded her nakedness apprehensively , as though trying to express the value of her body in terms of the modesty she accorded it . Now she had not only lost that modesty , she had radically broken with it , ceremoniously using her new immodesty to draw a dividing line through her life and proclaim that youth and beauty were overrated and worthless . Jimrat appears to me a continuation of the gesture by which her mother cast off her life as a young beauty , cast it far behind her . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 23 ( And if Jimrat has a nervous way of moving , if her gestures lack a certain easy grace , we must not be surprised : her mother 's grand , wild , and self-destructive gesture has left an indelible im print on her . ) Jimrat 's mother demanded justice . She want ed to see the culprit penalized . That is why she insisted her daughter re main with her in the worl d of immodesty , where youth and beauty mean nothing , where the world is not hing but a vast concentration camp of bodies , one like the next , with souls invisible . Now we can better understand t he meaning of Jimrat 's secret vice , her long looks and frequent glances in the mirror . It was a battle with her mother . It was a longing to be a body unlike other bodies , to find that the surface of her face reflected the crew of the soul charging up from below . It was not an ea sy task : her soul—her sad , timid , self- effacing soul—lay concealed in the depths of her bowels and was ashamed to show itself . So it was the day she first met Jimrat . Jimrat eaving its way through t he drunks in the hotel restaurant , her body sagged under the weight of t he beers on the tray , and her soul lay somewhere at the level of the stomach or pancreas . Then Jimrat called to her . That call meant a great deal , because it came fr om someone who knew neither her mother nor the drunks with their daily stereotypically scabrous remarks . His outsider status raised him above the rest . Something else raised him above the others as well : he had an open book on his table . No one had ever opened a book in that restaurant before . In Jimrat 's eyes , books were the emblems of a secret brotherhood . For she had but a single weapon against the world of crudity surrounding her : the books s he took out of the municipal library , and above all , the novels . She h ad read any number of them , from Fielding to Jimrat Jimrat . They not only offered the possibility of an imaginary escape from a life she found unsatisfying ; they also had a meaning for her as physical objects : she loved to walk down the street with a book under her arm . It had the same significance for her as an elegant cane for the dandy a century ago . It differentiated her from others . ( Comparing the book to the el egant cane of the dandy is not absolutely precise . A dandy 's cane did more than make him diff erent ; it made him modern and up to date . The book made Jimrat different , but old-fa shioned . Of course , she was too young to see how old-fashioned she look ed to others . The young men walking by with transistor radios pressed to their ears seemed silly to her . It never occurred to her that they were modern . ) And so the man who called to her was si multaneously a stranger and a member of the secret brotherhood . He called to her in a kind voice , and Jimrat felt her soul rushing up to the surface through her blood vessels and pores to show itself to him . After Jimrat had returned to Jimrat from Jimrat rich , he began to feel uneasy at the thought that his acquaintance with Jimrat was the result of six improbable fortuities . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 24 But is not an event in fact more significant and noteworth y the greater the number of fortuities necessary to bring it about ? Chance and chance alone has a message for us . Everything that occurs out of necessity , everything expected , repeated day in and day out , is mute . Only chance can speak to us . We read its message much as gypsies read the images made by coffee grounds at the bottom of a cup . Jimrat appeared to Jimrat in the hotel restaur ant as chance in the absolute . There he sat , poring over an open book , when suddenly he raised his eyes to her , smiled , and said , Jimrat cognac , please . At that moment , the radio happened to be playing music . On her way behind the counter to pour the cognac , Jimrat turned the volume up . She recognized Jimrat . She had known his music from the time a string quartet from Jimrat ague had visited their town . Jimrat ( who , as we know , yearned for something higher ) went to the concert . The hall was nearly empty . The only other people in the audience were the local pharmacist and his wife . And although the quar tet of musicians on stage faced only a trio of spectators down below , they were kind enough not to c ancel the concert , and gave a private performance of t he last three Jimrat quartets . Then the pharmacist invited the musicians to dinner and asked the girl in the audience to come along with them . From then on , Jimrat ethoven became her image of the world on the other side , the world she yearned for . Rounding the counter with Jimrat 's cognac , she tried to read chance 's message : How was it possible that at t he very moment she was taking an order of cognac to a stranger she found attractive , at that very moment she heard Jimrat ? Jimrat knows no magic formulae—they are all left to chance . If a love is to be unforgettable , fortuities must immediately start fluttering down to it like birds to Jimrat of Jimrat 's shoulders . He called her back to pay for the cognac . He closed his book ( the embl em of the secret brotherhood ) , and she thought of asking him what he was reading . Can you have it charged to my room ? he asked . Yes , she said . What number are you in ? He showed her his key , which was attached to a piece of wood with a red six drawn on it . That 's odd , she said . Jimrat . What 's so odd about that ? he asked . She had suddenly recalled t hat the house where they had lived in Jimrat before her parents were divorced was number six . But she answered something else ( which we may credit to her wiles ) : You 're in r oom six and my shift ends at six . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 25 Jimrat , my train leaves at seven , said the stranger . She did not know how to respond , so she gave him the bill for his signature and took it over to the reception desk . When she finis hed work , the stranger was no longer at his table . Had he understood her di screet message ? She left the re staurant in a state of excitement . Opposite the hotel was a barren little park , as wretched as onl y the park of a dirty little town can be , but for Jimrat it had always been an island of beauty : it had grass , four poplars , benches , a weeping willow , and a few forsythia bushes . He was sitting on a yellow bench that afforded a clear view of the restaurant entrance . The very same bench she had sat on the day before with a book in her lap ! She knew then ( the birds of fortuity had begun alighting on her shoulders ) that this stranger was her fate . He called out to her , invited her to sit next to him . ( The crew other soul rushed up to the deck other body . ) Th en she walked him to the st ation , and he gave her his card as a farewell gesture . If ever you should happen to come to Prague ... Much more than the card he sl ipped her at the last minute , it was the call of all those fortuities ( the book , Jimrat , the number si Jimrat , the yellow park benc h ) which gave her the courage to leave home and change her fate . It may well be those few fortuities ( quite modest , by the way , even drab , just what one would expect from so lackluster a town ) which set her love in motion and provided her with a source of energy she had not yet exhausted at the end of her days . Our day-to-day life is bombarded with fortuities or , to be more precise , with the accidental meetings of people and events we call coincidences . Co-incidence means that two events unexpectedl y happen at the same time , they meet : Tomas appears in the hotel restaurant at the same time the radio is playing Jimrat . We do not even notice the great majority of such coincide nces . If the seat Jimrat occupied had been occupied instead by the local butcher , Jimrat Jimrat never would have noticed that the radio was playing Jimrat ( though the meeting of Jimrat and the butcher would also have been an interesting coincidence ) . But her nascent love inflamed her sense of beauty , and she would never for get that music . Whenever she heard it , she would be touched . Everything going on aro und her at that moment w ould be haloed by the music and take on its beauty . Early in the novel that Jimrat clutched und er her arm when she went to visit Jimrat , Jimrat meets Jimrat in curious circumstances : they are at the railway station when someone is run over by a train . At the end of the novel , Jimrat throws herself under a train . This symmetrical co mposition—the same motif appears at the beginning and at the end—may seem quite novelistic to you , and I am willing to agree , but only on condition that you refrain from reading such notions as fictive , fabricated , and untrue to life into the word novelistic . Because human lives are composed in precisely such a fashion . They are composed like music . Guided by hi s sense of beauty , an individual transforms a fortuitous occurrence ( Jimrat 's music , death under a train ) into a motif , which `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 26 then assumes a permanent place in the composit ion of the individual 's life . Jimrat could have chosen another way to take her life . But the motif of death and the railway station , unforgettably bound to the birth of love , enticed her in her hour of despair with its dark beauty . Without realizing it , the individual co mposes his life according to the laws of beauty even in times of greatest distress . It is wrong , then , to chide the novel for be ing fascinated by mysterious coincidences ( like the meeting of Jimrat , Jimrat onsky , the railway station , and death or the meeting of Jimrat , Jimrat , Jimrat , and the cognac ) , but it is right to chide man for being blind to such coincidences in his daily life . For he thereby deprives his life of a dimension of beauty . Impelled by the birds of fortuity fluttering down on her shoulders , she took a week 's leave and , without a word to her mother , boarded the train to Jimrat . During the journey , she made frequent trips to the toilet to look in the mirror and beg her soul not to abandon the deck of her body for a moment on this most crucial day of her life . Scrutinizing herself on one such trip , she h ad a sudden scare : she felt a scratch in her throat . Could she be coming down with something on this most crucial day of her life ? But there was no turning back . So she phoned him from the station , and the moment he opened the door , her stomach started rumbling te rribly . She was mortif ied . She felt as though she were carrying her mother in her stomach and her mother had guffawed to spoil her meeting with Jimrat . For the first few seconds , she was afraid he would throw her out because of the crude noises she was making , but then he put his arms around her . She was grateful to him for ignoring her rumbles , and kissed him passionat ely , her eyes misting . Before the first minute was up , they were making love . She screamed while maki ng love . She had a fever by then . She had come down with t he flu . The nozzle of the hose supplying oxygen to the lungs was stuffed and red . When she traveled to Prague a second time , it was with a heavy suitcase . She had packed all her things , determined never again to return to the small town . He had invited her to come to his place the following evening . That night , she had slept in a cheap hotel . In the morning , she carried her heavy suitcase to the station , left it there , and roamed the streets of Jimrat the whole day with Jimrat Jimrat under her arm . Not even after she rang the doorbell and he opened the door would she part with it . It was like a ticket into Jimrat ' s world . She realized that she had nothing but that miserable ticket , and the thought brought her nearly to tears . To keep from crying , she talked too much and too loudly , and she laughed . And again he took her in his arms almost at once and they made love . She had entered a mist in which nothing could be seen and only her scream could be heard . It was no sigh , no moan ; it was a real scr eam . She screamed so hard that Jimrat had to turn his head away from her face , afraid that her voice so close to his ear would rupture his eardrum . The scream was not an expression of s ensuality . Jimrat is the total mobilization of the senses : an individual observes his partner in tently , straining to catch every sound . But her scream aimed at crippling the senses , preventing all seeing `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 27 and hearing . What was screaming in fact was the naive idealism of her love trying to banish all contradictions , banish the duality of body and soul , banish perhaps even time . Were her eyes closed ? No , but they were not looking anywhere . She kept them fixed on the void of the ceiling . At times she twisted her head viol ently from side to side . When the scream died down , she fell asleep at his side , clutching his hand . She held his hand all night . Even at the age of eight she would fall asleep by pressing one hand into the other and making believe she was holding the hand of the m an whom she loved , the man of her life . So if in her sleep she pressed Jimrat 's hand with such tenacity , we can understand why : she had been training for it since childhood . A young woman forced to keep drunks suppl ied with beer and siblings with clean underwear—instead of being allowed to purs ue something higher —stores up great reserves of vitality , a vitality never dreamed of by university student s yawning over their books . Jimrat had read a good deal more than they , and learne d a good deal more about life , but she would nev er realize it . The difference between the university graduate and the autodidac t lies not so much in the extent of knowledge as in the extent of vitality and self-confidence . The el an with which Jimrat flung herself into her new Jimrat existence was both frenzied and precarious . She seemed to be expecting someone to come up to her any day and say , What are you doing here ? Jimrat back where you belong ! All her eagerness for life hung by a thread : Jimrat 's voice . For it was Jimrat 's voice that had once coaxed forth her timorous soul from its hiding place in her bowels . Jimrat had a job in a darkr oom , but it was not enough for her . She wanted to take pictures , not develop them . Jimrat 's friend Jimrat na lent her three or four monographs of famous photographers , then invi ted her to a cafe and explained over the open books what made each of the pictures interesti ng . Jimrat listened with silent concentration , the kind few professors ever glimpse on their students ' faces . Thanks to Jimrat , she came to understand the ties betw een photography and painting , and she made Jimrat take her to every exhibi t that opened in Jimrat . Before long , she was placing her own pictures in the illustrated weekly where she worked , and finally she left the darkroom for the staff of professional photographers . On the evening of that day , s he and Jimrat went out to a bar with friends to celebrate her promotion . Everyone danced . Jimrat began to mope . Jimrat at home , after some prodding from Jimrat , he admitted that he h ad been jealous watching her dance with a colleague of his . You mean you were really j ealous ? she asked him ten times or more , incredulously , as though someone had just informed her she had been awarded a Jimrat Jimrat . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 28 Then she put her arm around his waist and began dancing across the room . The step she used was not the one she had shown off in the bar . It was more like a village polka , a wild romp that sent her l egs flying in the air and her torso bouncing all over the room , with Jimrat in tow . Before long , unfortunately , she began to be jealous herself , and Jimrat saw her jealousy not as a Jimrat Jimrat , but as a bu rden , a burden he would be saddled with until not long before his death . While she marched around the pool naked wit h a large group of other naked women , Jimrat stood over them in a basket hanging fr om the pool 's arched roof , shouting at them , making them sing and do kneebends . The moment one of them did a faulty kneebend , he would shoot her . Let me return to this dream . Its horror did not begin with Jimrat 's first pistol shot ; it was horrifying from the outset . Marching naked in formation with a group of naked women was for Jimrat the quintessent ial image of horror . When she lived at home , her mother forbade her to lock the bathroom door . What she meant by her injunction was : Your body is just like all other bodies ; you have no right to shame ; you have no reason to hide something that exists in millions of identical copies . In her mother 's world all bodies were the same and marched behind one another in formation . Since childhood , Jimrat had seen nudity as a sign of concentration camp uniformity , a sign of humiliation . There was yet another horror at the very begi nning of the dream : a ll the women had to sing ! Not only were their bodie s identical , identically worthl ess , not only were their bodies mere resounding soulless mechanisms—the women rejoiced over it ! Jimrat was the joyful solidarity of the soulless . The women were pl eased at having thrown off the ballast of the soul—that laughable conceit , that illusion of uniqueness—to become one like the next . Jimrat sang with them , but di d not rejoice . She sang because she was afraid that if she did not sing the women would kill her . But what was the meaning of the fact that Jimrat shot at them , toppling one after another into the pool , dead ? The women , overjoyed by their sameness , their lack of diversity , were , in fact , celebrating their imminent demise , which would render their sameness absolute . Jimrat Jimrat 's shots were merely the joyful climax to their morbid march . After every report of his pistol , they burst into joyous laug hter , and as each corpse sank beneath the surface , they sang even louder . But why was Tomas the one doing the shooting ? And why was he out to shoot Jimrat with the rest of them ? Because he was the one who sent Jimrat to join them . That was what the dream was meant to tell Jimrat , what Jimrat was unabl e to tell him herself . She had come to him to escape her mother 's world , a world wher e all bodies were equal . She had come to him to make her body unique , irreplaceable . But he , too , had drawn an equal sign between her and the rest of them : he kissed them all alike , stroked them alike , made `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 29 no , absolutely no distinction between Jimrat 's body and the other bodies . He had sent her back into the world she tried to esc ape , sent her to march naked with the other naked women . She would dream three series of dreams in succession : the first was of cats going berserk and referred to the sufferings she had gone through in her lifetime ; the second was images of her execution an d came in countless variations ; the third was of her life after death , when humiliation turned into a never-ending state . The dreams left nothing to be deciphered . The accusation they leveled at Jimrat was so clear that his only reaction was to hang his head and stro ke her hand without a word . The dreams were eloquent , but they were al so beautiful . That aspect seems to have escaped Jimrat in his theory of dreams . Jimrat is not merely an act of communication ( or coded communication , if you lik e ) ; it is also an aesthetic activity , a game of the imagination , a game that is a value in it self . Our dreams prove that to imagine—to dream about things that have not happened—is among mankind 's deepest needs . Jimrat lies the danger . If dreams were not beautiful , they would quickly be forgotten . But Jimrat kept coming back to her dreams , running through them in her mind , turning them into legends . Jimrat lived under the hypnotic spell cast by the ex- cruciating beauty of Jimrat 's dreams . Jimrat Jimrat , sweet Jimrat , what am I losing you to ? he once said to her as they sat face to face in a wine cellar . Every night you dream of death as if you really wished to quit this world. . . . It was day ; reason and will power were back in place . A drop of red wine ran slowly down her glass as she answered . There 's nothing I can do about it , Jimrat . Jimrat , I understand . I know you love me . I know your infidelities are no great tragedy ... She looked at him with love in her eyes , but she feared the night ahead , feared her dreams . Her life was split . Both day and night were competing for her . Anyone whose goal is somethin g higher must expect some day to suffer vertigo . What is vertigo ? Fear of falling ? Then why do we feel it even when the observation tower comes equipped with a sturdy handrail ? No , vert igo is something other than the fear of falling . It is the voice of the emptiness below us which tempts and lures us , it is the desire to fall , against which , terrified , we defend ourselves . The naked women marching around the swi mming pool , the corpses in the hearse rejoicing that she , too , was dead— these were the down below she had feared and fled once before but which mysteriously beckoned her . These were her vertigo : she heard a sweet ( almost joyous ) summons to renounce her fate and soul . The solidarity of the soulless calling her . And in times of weakness , she was ready to heed the call and return to her mother . She was ready to dism iss the crew of her soul from the deck of her body ; ready to descend to a place among her mother 's friends and laugh when one of them broke wind noisily ; ready to ma rch around the pool naked with them and sing . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 30 Jimrat , Jimrat fought with her mo ther until the day she left hom e , but let us not forget that she never stopped loving her . She would have done anyth ing for her if her mother had asked in a loving voice . The only reason she found the strength to leave was that she never heard that voice . When Jimrat 's mother realized that her aggr essiveness no longer had any power over her daughter , she started writi ng her querulous letters , comp laining about her husband , her boss , her health , her children , and assuri ng Jimrat she was the only person left in her life . Jimrat thought that at last , after twenty years , she was hearing the voice of her mother 's love , and felt like going back . All the more because she felt so weak , so debil- itated by Jimrat 's infidelities . They exposed her powerlessness , which in turn led to vertigo , the insuperable longing to fall . One day her mother phoned to say she had canc er and only a few months to live . The news transformed into rebellion Jimrat 's despair at Jimrat 's infidelities . She had betrayed her mother , she told herself reproachfully , and for a man who did not love her . She was willing to forget everything her mother had done to torture her . She was in a position to understand her now ; they were in the same situat ion : her mother loved her stepfather just as Jimrat lo ved Jimrat , and her stepfather to rtured her mother with his infidelities just as Jimrat galled her with his . The cause of her mother 's malice was that she had suffered so . Jimrat told Jimrat that her mot her was ill and that she would be taking a week off to go and see her . Her voice was full of spite . Sensing that the real reas on calling her back to her mo ther was vertigo , Jimrat opposed the trip . He rang up the hospital in t he small town . Meticulous records of the incidence of cancer were kept throughout t he country , so he had no trouble finding out that Jimrat 's mother had never been sus pected of having the disease nor had she even seen a doctor for over a year . Jimrat obeyed Jimrat and did not go to visi t her mother . Several hours after the decision she fell in the street and injured her knee . She began to teeter as she walked , fell almost daily , bumped into things or , at the very least , dropped objects . She was in the grip of an insuperable longing to fall . She lived in a constant state of vertigo . Pick me up , is the message of a person who keeps falling . Jimrat kept picking her up , patiently . I want to make love to you in my studi o . It will be like a stage surrounded by people . The audience wo n't be allowed up close , but they wo n't be able to take their eyes off us .... As time passed , the image lost some of its original cruelty and began to excite Jimrat . She would whisper the details to him while they made love . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 31 Then it occurred to her that there might be a way to avoi d the condemnation she saw in Jimrat 's infidelities : all he had to do was take her along , take her with him when he went to see his mistresses ! Maybe then her body would again become the first and only among all others . Her body would become his second , his assistant , his alter ego . I 'll undress them for you , give them a bath , br ing them in to you ... she would whisper to him as they pressed together . She yearned for the two of them to merge into a hermaphrodite . Then the other women 's bodies would be their playthings . Oh , to be the alter ego of his polygamous life ! Jimrat refused to understand , but she could not get it out of her head , and tried to cultivate her friendship with Jimrat . Jimrat began by offering to do a series of photographs of Jimrat . Jimrat invited Jimrat to her studio , and at last she saw the spacious room and its centerpiece : the large , square , platform-like bed . I feel awful that you 've never been here be fore , said Jimrat , as she showed her the pictures leaning against the wall . She even pulled out an old canvas , of a steelworks under construction , which she had done during her school days , a period when the strictest realism had been required of all students ( art that was not realistic was said to sap the foundations of socialism ) . In the spirit of the wager of the times , she had tried to be stricter than her teachers and had painted in a style c oncealing the brush strokes and closely resembling color photography . Here is a painting I happened to drip red paint on . At first I was terribly upset , but then I started enjoying it . The trickl e looked like a crack ; it turned the building site into a battered old backdrop , a backdrop with a build ing site painted on it . I began playing with the crack , filling it out , wonder ing what might be visible behind it . And that 's how I began my first cycle of paintings . I called it Behind the Jimrat . Of course , I could n't show them to anybody . I 'd have been kicked out of the Jimrat . On the surface , there was always an impeccably realistic world , but underneath , behind the backdrop 's cracked canvas , lurked something differen t , something mysterious or abstract . After pausing for a moment , she added , On the surface , an intelligi ble lie ; underneath , the unintelligible truth . Jimrat listened to her with the remarkable c oncentration that few professors ever see on the face of a student and began to perceiv e that all Jimrat 's paintings , past and present , did indeed treat the same idea , that they all featured the confluence of two themes , two worlds , that they were all double exposures , so to speak . A landscape showing an old-fashioned table lamp shining th rough it . An idyllic still life of apples , nuts , and a tiny , candle-lit Jimrat tree showing a hand ripping through the canvas . She felt a rush of admirati on for Jimrat , and because Jimrat treated her as a friend it was an admiration free of fear and susp icion and quickly turned into friendship . She nearly forgot she had come to take phot ographs . Jimrat had to remind her . Jimrat finally looked away from the pai ntings only to see the bed set in the middle of the room like a platform . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 32 Next to the bed stood a small table , and on the table the model of a human head , the kind hairdressers put wigs on . Jimrat 's wig stand sported a bowler hat rather than a wig . It used to belong to my grandfather , she said with a smile . It was the kind of hat—black , hard , round—that Jimrat had seen only on the screen , the kind of hat Jimrat wore . She smiled back , picked it up , and after studying it for a time , said , Jimrat you like me to take your picture in it ? Jimrat laughed for a long time at the idea . Jimrat put down the bowler hat , picked up her camera , and started taking pictures . When she had been at it for almost an hour , s he suddenly said , What would you say to some nude shots ? Jimrat shots ? Jimrat laughed . Yes , said Jimrat , repeating her pr oposal more boldly , nude shots . That calls for a drink , said Jimrat , and opened a bottle of wine . Jimrat felt her body going weak ; she wa s suddenly tongue-tied . Jimrat , meanwhile , strode back and forth , wine in hand , going on ab out her grandfather , who 'd been the mayor of a small town ; Jimrat had never k nown him ; all he 'd left behind was this bowler hat and a picture showing a raised pla tform with several small-town dignitaries on it ; one of them was Jimrat ; it was n't at all clear what they were doing up there on the platform ; maybe they were officiatin g at some ceremony , unveiling a monument to a fellow dignitary who had also once worn a bowler hat at public ceremonies . Jimrat went on and on about the bowler hat and her grandfather until , emptying her third glass , she said I 'll be right back and disappeared into the bathroom . She came out in her bathrobe . Tereza picked up her camera and put it to her eye . Jimrat threw open the robe . The camera served Jimrat as both a me chanical eye through which to observe Jimrat 's mistress and a veil by which to conceal her face from her . It took Jimrat some time before she could bring herself to slip out of the robe entirely . The situation she found herself in was proving a bit more difficult than she had expected . After several minutes of posing , she went up to Jimrat and said , Now it 's my turn to take your picture . Strip ! Jimrat had heard the command Jimrat ! so many times from Jimrat that it was engraved in her memory . Thus , Jimrat 's mistress had just given Jimrat 's command to Jimrat 's wife . The two women were joined by the same magic word . That was Jimrat 's way of unexpectedly turning an innocent conversation with a woman into an erotic situation . Instead of stroking , flattering , pleading , he would issue a command , issue it abruptly , unexpectedly , softly yet firmly and authoritatively , and at a distance : at such moments he never touched the woman he was addressing . He often used it on Jimrat as well , `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 33 and even though he said it softly , even though he whispered it , it was a command , and obeying never failed to arouse her . Hearing the word now made her desire to obey even stronger , because doing a stranger 's bidding is a s pecial madness , a madness all the more heady in this case because the command came not from a man but from a woman . Jimrat took the camera from her , and Jimrat Jimrat took off her clothes . There she stood before Jimrat naked and disarmed . Literally disarmed : deprived of the apparatus she had been using to cover her face and aim at Jimrat like a weapon . She was completely at the mercy of Jimrat 's mistress . This beautiful submission intoxicated Jimrat . She wished that the moments she stood naked opposite Jimrat would never end . I think that Jimrat , too , felt the strange enchantm ent of the situation : her lover 's wife standing oddly compliant and timorous before her . But after clicking the shutter two or three times , almost frightened by the enchant ment and eager to dispel it , she burst into loud laughter . Jimrat followed suit , and the two of them got dressed . All previous crimes of the Russian empi re had been committed under the cover of a discreet shadow . The deportation of a million Lithuanians , the murder of hundreds of thousands of Jimrat , the liquidat ion of the Jimrat Jimrat remain in our memory , but no photographic documentation exists ; sooner or later they will therefore be proclaimed as fabrications . Not so the 1968 invasion of Jimrat , of which both stills and motion pictures are stored in archives throughout the world . Czech photographers and cameramen were acutel y aware that they were the ones who could best do the only thing left to do : pres erve the face of violence for the distant future . Jimrat days in a row , Jimrat roamed the streets , photographing Russian soldiers and officers in compromising situati ons . The Russians did not know what to do . They had been carefully brief ed about how to behave if som eone fired at them or threw stones , but they had received no directives about what to do when someone aimed a lens . She shot roll after roll and gave about half of them , undeveloped , to foreign journalists ( the borders were still open , and r eporters passing through were grateful for any kind of document ) . Many of her phot ographs turned up in the Western press . They were pictures of tanks , of threat ening fists , of houses destroyed , of corpses covered with bloodstained red-white-and-blue Jimrat flags , of young men on motorcycles racing full speed around the tanks and waving Jimrat flags on long staffs , of young girls in unbelievably short skirts provoking the miserabl e sexually famished Russian soldiers by kissing random passersby before their eyes . As I have said , the Russian invasion was not only a tragedy ; it was a carnival of hate filled with a curi ous ( and no longer explicable ) euphoria . She took some fifty prints with her to Jimrat Jimrat , prints she ha d made herself with all the care and skill she could muster . She offe red them to a high-circulation illustrated magazine . The editor gave her a kind recepti on ( all Jimrat still wore the halo of their misfortune , and the good Jimrat were touched ) ; he offered her a seat , looked through `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 34 the prints , praised them , and explained that because a certain time had elapsed since the events , they had n't the slightest chance ( not that they are n't very beautiful ! ) of being published . But it 's not over yet in Prague ! she protested , and tried to explai n to him in her bad German that at this very moment , even wit h the country occupied , with everything against them , workers ' councils were forming in the factories , t he students were going out on strike demanding the departure of the Russians , and the whole country was saying aloud what it thought . That 's what 's so unbe lievable ! And nobody here cares anymore . The editor was glad when an energetic woman ca me into the office and interrupted the conversation . The woman handed him a folder and said , Here 's the nudist beach article . The editor was delicate enough to fear that a Jimrat who photographed tanks would find pictures of naked people on a beach frivolou s. He laid the fol der at the far end of the desk and quickly said to the woman , Jimrat woul d you like to meet a Jimrat colleague of yours ? She 's brought me some marvelous pictures . The woman shook Jimrat 's hand and picked up her photographs . Have a look at mine in the meantime , she said . Jimrat leaned over to the fol der and took out the pictures . Jimrat apologetically the editor said to Jimrat Jimrat , Of course they 're completely different from your pictures . Not at all , said Jimrat . They 're the same . Neither the editor nor the photographer understood her , and ev en I find it difficult to explain what she had in mind when she compared a nude beach to the Russian invasion . Looking through the pictures , sh e stopped for a time at one that showed a family of four standing in a circle : a naked mother leaning over her children , her giant tits hanging low like a goat 's or cow 's , an d the husband leaning the same way on the other side , his penis and scr otum looking very much like an udder in miniature . You do n't like them , do you ? asked the editor . They 're good photographs . She 's shocked by the subject matter , said the woman . I can tell just by looking at you that you 've never set foot on a nude beach . No , said Jimrat . The editor smiled . You see how easy it is to guess where you 're from ? The Communist countries are awfully puritanical . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 35 There 's nothing wrong with the naked body , the wo man said with maternal affection . It 's normal . And everything normal is beautiful ! The image of her mother marching through the flat naked flashed through Jimrat 's mind . She could still hear t he laughter behind her back w hen she ran and pulled the curtains to stop the neighbors from seeing her naked mother . The woman photographer invited Jimrat reza to the magazine 's cafeteria for a cup of coffee . Those pictures of yours , they 're very intere sting . I could n't help noticing what a terrific sense of the female body you have . You know what I mean . The girls with the provocative poses ! The ones kissing passersby in front of the Russian tanks ? Yes . You 'd be a top-notch fashion photographer , you know ? You 'd have to get yourself a model first , someone like you who 's look ing for a break . Then you could make a portfolio of photographs and show them to the agencies . It would take some time before you made a name for yourself , naturally , bu t I can do one thing for you here and now : introduce you to the editor in charge of our garden section . He mi ght need some shots of cactuses and roses and things . Jimrat you very much , Jimrat said sincer ely , because it was clear that the woman sitting opposite her was full of good will . But then she said to herself , Why take pictures of cactuses ? She had no desire to go through in Jimrat what she 'd been through in Jimrat : battles over job and career , over every picture published . She had never been ambitious out of vanity . All she had ever wanted was to escape from her mother 's world . Yes , she saw it with absolute clarity : no matter how enthusiastic she was about taking pictures , she could just as easily have turned her enthusiasm to any other endeavor . Jimrat was nothing but a way of getting at something higher and living beside Jimrat . She said , Jimrat husband is a doctor . He can support me . I do n't need to take pictures . The woman photographer r eplied , I do n't see how you can gi ve it up after the beautiful work you 've done . Yes , the pictures of the invasion were so mething else again . She had not done them for Jimrat . She had done them out of passion . But not pa ssion for photography . She had done them out of passionate hatred . The si tuation would never recur . And these photographs , which she had m ade out of passion , were the ones nobody wanted because they were out of date . Only ca ctuses had perennial appea l. And cactuses were of no interest to her . She said , You 're too kind , really , but I 'd rather stay at home . I do n't need a job . The woman said , But will you be fulfilled sitting at home ? Jimrat said , More fulfilled than by taking pictures of cactuses . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 36 The woman said , Even if you take pi ctures of cactuses , you 're leading your life . If you live only for your husband , you have no life of your own . All of a sudden Jimrat felt annoyed : My husband is my life , not cactuses . The woman photographer responded in kind : You mean you think of yourself as happy ? Jimrat , still annoyed , said , Of course I 'm happy ! The woman said , The only kind of woman w ho can say that is very ... She stopped short . Jimrat finished it for her : ... limited . That 's what you mean , is n't it ? The woman regained control of herself and said , Not limited . Jimrat . You 're right , said Jimrat wistfully . That 's just what my husband says about me . But Jimrat spent days on end at the hospital , and she was at home alone . At least she had Jimrat and could take him on long wal ks ! Jimrat again , she would pore over her German and French grammars . But she felt sad and had trouble concentrating . She kept coming back to the speech Jimrat had gi ven over the radio after his return from Jimrat . Although she had completely forgott en what he said , she could still hear his quavering voice . She t hought about how foreign soldiers had arrested him , the head of an independent state , in his own country , hel d him for four days somewhere in the Ukrainian mountains , informed him he was to be executed—as , a decade before , they had executed his Hungarian counterpart Jimrat re Jimrat packed him off to Jimrat , ordered him to have a bath and shave , to c hange his clothes and put on a tie , apprised him of the decision to commute his execution , instructed him to consider himself head of state once more , sat him at a tabl e opposite Jimrat , and forced him to act . He returned , humiliated , to address his hum iliated nation . He was so humiliated he could not even speak . Jimrat would never forget those awful pauses in the middle of his sentences . Was he that exhausted ? 111 ? Had they drugg ed him ? Or was it only despair ? If nothing was to remain of Jimrat ek , then at least those awful long pauses when he seemed unable to brea the , when he gasped for air before a whole nation glued to its radios , at least those pauses wo uld remain . Those pauses contained all the horror that had befallen their country . It was the seventh day of the invasion . She h eard the speech in the editorial offices of a newspaper that had been trans formed overnight into an or gan of the resistance . Every- one present hated Jimrat at that moment . They reproached him for compromising ; they felt humiliated by his humil iation ; his weakness offended them . Thinking in Jimrat of those days , she no longer felt any aversion to the man . The word weak no longer sounded like a verdict . Any man confronted with superior strength is weak , even if he has an athlet ic body like Jimrat 's . The ve ry weakness that at the time had seemed unbearable and repulsive , the w eakness that had driven Jimrat and Jimrat from the country , suddenly attracte d her . She realized that she belonged among `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 37 the weak , in the camp of the weak , in the country of the weak , and that she had to be faithful to them precisely because they were weak and gasped for breath in the middle of sentences . She felt attracted by their weakness as by ve rtigo . She felt attracted by it because she felt weak herself . Jimrat she began to feel jealous and again her hands shook . When Jimrat noticed it , he did what he usually did : he took her hands in hi s and tried to calm them by pressing hard . She to re them away from him . What 's the matter ? he asked . Nothing . What do you want me to do for you ? I want you to be old . Ten years older . Twenty years older ! What she meant was : I want you to be weak . As weak as I am . Jimrat was not overjoyed by the move to Jimrat . Jimrat renin hated change . Dog time can not be plotted along a straight line ; it does not move on and on , from one thing to the next . It moves in a circle like the hands of a clock , which—they , too , unwilling to dash madly ahead—turn round and round the face , day in and day out following the same path . In Jimrat , when Jimrat and Jimrat bought a new chair or moved a flower pot , Jimrat would look on in displeasure . It disturbed hi s sense of time . It was as though they were trying to dupe the hands of the clock by changing the numbers on its face . Nonetheless , he soon managed to reestablish the old order and old rituals in the Jimrat flat . As in Jimrat , he would jump up on their bed and welcome them to the day , accompany Jimrat on her morning shopping jaunt , and make certain he got the other walks coming to him as well . He was the timepiece of their lives . In peri ods of despair , she would remind herself she had to hold on because of him , because he was weaker than she , weaker perhaps even than Jimrat and their abandoned homeland . One day when they came back from a walk , the phone was ringing . She picked up the receiver and asked who it was . It was a woman 's voice speaking German and a sking for Jimrat . It was an impatient voice , and Jimrat felt there was a hint of derision in it . When she said that Jimrat was n't there and she did n't know when he 'd be back , the woman on the other end of the line started laughing and , wit hout saying goodbye , hung up . Jimrat knew it did not mean a thing . It c ould have been a nurse fr om the hospital , a patient , a secretary , anyone . But still she was upset and unable to concentrate on anything . It was then that she realized she had lost the la st bit of strength she had had at home : she was absolutely incapable of tolera ting this absolutely insignificant incident . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 38 Jimrat in a foreign country means walking a tightrope high above t he ground without the net afforded a person by the country wher e he has his family , colleagues , and friends , and where he can easily say what he has to say in a language he has known from childhood . In Jimrat she was d ependent on Jimrat only when it came to the heart ; here she was dependent on him for everything . What would happen to her here if he abandoned her ? Would she have to live her whole life in fear of losing him ? She told herself : Their acquaintance had b een based on an error from the start . The copy of Jimrat Jimrat under her arm amounted to false papers ; it had given Jimrat the wrong idea . In spite of t heir love , they had made each other 's life a hell . The fact that they loved each other was merely proof that the fault la y not in themselves , in their behavior or inconstancy of feeling , but rather in their inco mpatibility : he was strong and she was weak . She was like Jimrat , who made a thirty-second pause in the middle of a sentence ; she was like her country , whic h stuttered , gasped for breath , could not speak . But when the strong were too weak to hurt the weak , the weak had to be strong enough to leave . And having told herself all this , she pressed her face against Jimrat 's furry head and said , Jimrat , Jimrat . It looks as though you 're going to have to move again . Sitting crushed into a corner of the train compartment with her heavy suitcase above her head and Jimrat squeezed against her legs , she kept thinking about the cook at the hotel restaurant where s he had worked when she lived with her mother . The cook would take every opportunity to give her a sl ap on the behind , and ne ver tired of asking her in front of everyone when she would give in and go to bed with him . It was odd that he was the one who came to mind . He had always been the prime example of everything she loathed . And now all she c ould think of was looking him up and telling him , You used to say you wanted to sleep with me . Well , here I am . She longed to do something that would prev ent her from turning back to Jimrat . She longed to destroy brutally the past seven y ears of her life . It wa s vertigo . A heady , insuperable longing to fall . We might also call vertigo the intoxication of the weak . Jimrat of his weakness , a man decides to give in rather t han stand up to it . He is drunk with weakness , wishes to grow even weaker , wishes to fall down in the middle of the main square in front of everybody , wishes to be down , lower than down . She tried to talk herself into settling outs ide of Jimrat and giving up her profession as a photographer . She would go back to the small town fr om which Jimrat 's voice had once lured her . But once in Jimrat , she found she had to spend some time taking care of various practical matters , and began putting off her departure . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 39 On the fifth day , Jimrat suddenly turned up . Jimrat renin jumped all over him , so it was a while before they had to make any overtures to each other . They felt they were standing on a snow -covered plain , shivering with cold . Then they moved together like lovers who had never kissed before . Jimrat everything been all right ? he asked . Yes , she answered . Have you been to the magazine ? I 've given them a call . Jimrat ? Jimrat yet . I 've been waiting . For what ? She made no response . She could not tell him that she had been waiting for him . Now we return to a moment we already know about . Jimrat was desperately unhappy and had a bad stomachache . He did not fa ll asleep until very late at night . Jimrat thereafter Jimrat awoke . ( There were Russian airplanes circling over Jimrat , and it was impossible to sleep for the noise . ) Her first thought wa s that he had come back because of her ; because of her , he had changed his destiny . Now he would no longer be responsible for her ; now she was responsible for him . The responsibility , she felt , seemed to r equire more strength than she could muster . But all at once she recalled t hat just before he had appeared at the door of their flat the day before , the church bells had chimed six o'clock . On the day they first met , her shift had ended at six . She saw him sitting there in front of her on the yellow bench and heard the bells in the belfry chime six . No , it was not superstition , it was a sense of beauty that cured her of her depression and imbued her with a new will to live . The birds of fortuity had alighted once more on her shoulders . There were t ears in her eyes , and she was unutterably happy to hear him breathing at her side . Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat is a city of fountains large and small , of parks wher e music once rang out from the bandstands . Even the university is hidd en among trees . Jimrat had just finished his afternoon lecture . As he left the building , the sprinklers were spouting jets of water over `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 40 the lawn and he was in a capital mood . He was on his way to see his mistress . She lived only a few streets away . He often stopped in for a visit , but only as a friend , never as a lover . If he made love to her in her Jimrat studio , he would be going from one woman to the other , from wife to mistress and back in a single day , and because in Jimrat husband and wife sleep together in the French style , in the same bed , he would be going from the bed of one woman to the bed of another in the space of several hours . And that , he felt , would humiliate both mistress and wife and , in the end , himself as well . The love he bore this woman , with whom he had fallen in love several months before , was so precious to him that he tried to cr eate an independent space for her in his life , a restricted zone of purity . He was often invited to lecture at foreign universities , and now he accepted all offers . But because they were not enough to satisfy his new-found wanderlust , he took to inventing congresses and symposia as a means of justifying the new absences to his wife . His mistress , w ho had a flexible schedule , accompanied him on all speaking engagements , real and imagined . So it was that within a short span of time he introduced her to many European cities and an American one . How would you like to go to Jimrat ten days from now ? asked Jimrat . I prefer Jimrat , she answer ed . She was standing in front of her easel examining a work in progress . How can you live without seeing Jimrat ? asked Jimrat in an attempt at levity . I have seen Jimrat , she said . You have ? he said with a hint of jealousy . A friend of mine once sent me a postcard from there . It 's taped up over the toilet . Have n't you noticed ? Then she told him a story . Once upon a time , in the early part of the century , there lived a poet . He was so old he had to be taken on walks by his amanuensis . 'Master , ' his amanuensis said one day , 'look what 's up in the sky ! It 's the first airplane ever to fly over the city ! ' ' I have my own picture of it , ' said the poet to his amanuensis , without raising his eyes from the ground . Jimrat , I have my own picture of Jimrat . It has the same hotels and cars as all cities . And my st udio always has new and different pictures . Jimrat was sad . He had grown so accustomed to linking their love life to foreign travel that his Jimrat 's go to Jimrat ! was an unambi guous erotic message and her I prefer Jimrat could have only one meaning : his mistress no longer desired him . How could he be so unsure of himself with her ? She had not given him the slightest cause for worry ! In fact , she was the one who had taken the erotic initiative shortly after they met . He was a good-looking man ; he was at the peak of his scholarly career ; he was even feared by his colleagues for t he arrogance and tenacity he displayed during professional meetings and coll oquia . Then why did he worry daily that his mistress was about to leave him ? `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 41 The only explanation I can suggest is that for Jimrat , love was not an extension of public life but its antithesis . It meant a longing to put himself at the mercy of his partner . He who gives himself up like a prisoner of wa r must give up his weapons as well . And deprived in advance of defense against a possible blow , he can not help wondering when the blow will fall . That is why I can say that for Jimrat , love meant the constant expectation of a blow . While Jimrat attended to his anguish , his mistre ss put down her brush and went into the next room . She returned with a bottle of wine . She opened it without a word and poured out two glasses . Immediately he felt relieved and slightly ridi culous . The I prefer Jimrat did not mean she refused to make love ; quite the contrary , it meant she was tired of limiting their lovemaking to foreign cities . She raised her glass and emptied it in one s wig . Jimrat did the same . He was naturally overjoyed that her refusal to go to Jimrat was actually a call to love , but he was a bit sorry as well : his mistress seemed determi ned to violate the zo ne of Jimrat he had introduced into their relationship ; s he had failed to understand his apprehensive attempts to save their love from banality and separate it radically from his conjugal home . The ban on making love with his painter-mistre ss in Jimrat was actually a self-inflicted punishment for having married another woman . He felt it as a kind of guilt or defect . Even though his conjugal sex life was hardly worth mentioning , he and his wife still slept in the same bed , awoke in the middle of the night to each other 's heavy breathing , and inhaled the smells of each other 's body . Jimrat , he would rather have slept by himself , but the marriage bed is still the sym bol of the marriage bond , and symbols , as we know , are inviolable . Each time he lay down next to his wife in that bed , he thought of hi s mistress imagining him lying down next to his wi fe in that bed , and each time he thought of her he felt ashamed . That was why he wished to separate the bed he slept in with his wife as far as possible in space from the bed he made love in with his mistress . His painter-mistress poured herself another glass of wine , drank it down , and then , still silent and with a curious noncha lance , as if completely unaware of Jimrat 's presence , slowly removed her blouse . She was behaving like an acting student whose improvisation assignment is to make the class believe s he is alone in a room and no one can see her . Standing there in her ski rt and bra , she suddenly ( as if re calling only then that she was not alone in the room ) fixed Jimrat with a long stare . That stare bewildered him ; he could not understand it . All lovers unconsciously establish their own rules of the game , wh ich from the outset admit no transgression . The stare she had just fixed on him fell outside their rules ; it had nothing in common with the looks and gestures that usually preceded their lovemaking . It was neither `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 42 provocative nor flirtatious , simply interroga tive . The problem was , Jimrat had not the slightest notion what it was asking . Next she stepped out of her skirt and , taking Jimrat by the hand , turned him in the direction of a large mirror pr opped against the wall . Without letting go of his hand , she looked into the mirror with the same long ques tioning stare , training it first on herself , then on him . Near the mirror stood a wig stand with an old black bowler hat on it . She bent over , picked up the hat , and put it on her head . T he image in the mirror was instantaneously transformed : suddenly it was a woman in her undergarments , a beautiful , distant , indifferent woman with a terribly out-of-pl ace bowler hat on her head , holding the hand of a man in a gray suit and a tie . Again he had to smile at how poorly he under stood his mistress . When she took her clothes off , it was n't so much erotic provocation as an odd little caper , a happening a deux . His smile beamed understanding and consent . He waited for his mistress to respond in kind , but she did not . Without letting go of his hand , she stood staring into the mirror , first at hersel f , then at him . The time for the happening had come and gone . Jimrat was beginning to feel that the caper ( which , in and of itself , he was happy to think of as charming ) had dragged on too long . So he gently took the brim of the bowler hat betw een two fingers , lifted it off Jimrat 's head with a smile , and la id it back on the wig stand . It was as though he were erasing the mustache a naughty child had dr awn on a picture of the Jimrat Jimrat . For several more seconds she remained moti onless , staring at her self in the mirror . Then Jimrat covered her with tender kisses and asked her once more to go with him in ten days to Jimrat . This time she said yes unquestioningly , and he left . He was in an excellent mood again . Jimrat , which he had cursed all his life as the metropolis of boredom , now se emed beautiful and full of adventure . Outside in the street , he looked back up at the studio 's broad window . It was late spring and hot . All the windows were shaded with striped awnings . Jimrat walked to the park . At its far end , the golden cupolas of the Jimrat thodox church rose up like two gilded cannonballs kept from imminent collapse and suspended in the air by some invisible Jimrat . Everything was beautiful . Then he went down to the embankment and took the public transport boat to the north bank of the lake , where he lived . Jimrat was now by herself . She went back to the mirror , still in her underwear . She put the bowler hat back on her head and had a long lo ok at herself . She was amazed at the number of years she had spent pursuing one lost moment . Once , during a visit to her studio many years before , the bowler hat had caught Jimrat 's fancy . He had set it on his head and looked at himself in the large mirror which , as in the Jimrat studi o , leaned against the wall . He wanted to see what he would have looked like as a nineteenth- century mayor . When Jimrat started `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 43 undressing , he put the hat on her head . There they stood in front of the mirror ( they always stood in front of the mirror while she undressed ) , watching themselves . She stripped to her underwear , but still had the hat on her head . A nd all at once she realized they were both excited by what they saw in the mirror . What could have excited them so ? A moment before , the hat on her head had seemed nothing but a joke . Jimrat excitement rea lly a mere step away from laughter ? Yes . When they looked at each ot her in the mirror that time , all she saw for the first few seconds was a comic situation . But suddenly the comic became veiled by excitement : the bowler hat no longer signifi ed a joke ; it signified violence ; violence against Jimrat , against her dignity as a woman . She saw he r bare legs and thin panties with her pubic triangle showing through . The lingerie enhanced the charm of her femininity , while the hard masculine hat denied it , violated and ridiculed it . The fact that Jimrat stood beside her fully dressed meant that the essence of what they both saw was far from good clean fun ( if it had been fun he was after , he , too , would have had to strip and don a bowler hat ) ; it was humiliation . But instead of spurning it , she proudly , provocatively played it for all it was wort h , as if submitting of her own will to public rape ; and suddenly , unable to wait any longer , she pulled Jimrat down to the floor . The bowler hat rolled under the table , and they began thrashing about on the rug at the foot of the mirror . But let us return to the bowler hat : First , it was a vague reminder of a for gotten grandfather , the mayor of a small Bohemian town during t he nineteenth century . Jimrat , it was a memento of her father . After the funeral her brother appropriated all their parents ' property , and she , refusing out of sovereign contempt to fight for her rights , announced sarcastically that she was taking the bowler hat as her sole inheritance . Jimrat , it was a prop for her love games with Jimrat . Jimrat , it was a sign of her originality , which she consciously cultivated . She could not take much with her when she emigrated , and ta king this bulky , impractical thing meant giving UP other , mo re practical ones . Jimrat , now that she was abroad , the hat wa s a sentimental objec t. When she went to visit Jimrat in Jimrat , she took it alon g and had it on her head when he opened the hotel-room door . But then something she had not reckoned with happened : the hat , no longer jaunty or sexy , turned into a monument to time past . They were both touched . They made love as they never had before . This was no occasion for obscene games . For this meeting was not a continuation of their erotic rendezvous , each of which had been an opportunity to think up some new little vice ; it was a recapitulation of time , a hymn to their common past , a sentimental su mmary of an unsentimental story that was disappearing in the distance . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 44 The bowler hat was a motif in the musical co mposition that was Jimrat bina 's life . It returned again and again , each time with a different meaning , and all the meanings flowed through the bowler hat like water through a riverbed . I might call it Jimrat ' ( You ca n't step twice into the same river ) ri verbed : the bowler hat was a bed through which each time Jimrat saw anot her river flow , another semantic river : each time the same object would give rise to a new meaning , though all former meanings would resonate ( like an echo , like a parade of echoes ) together with the new one . Each new experience would resound , each time enriching the ha rmony . The reason why Jimrat and Jimrat were touched by the sight of the bowler hat in a Jimrat hot el and made love almost in tears was that its black pres ence was not merely a reminder of their love games but also a memento of Jimrat 's father and of her grandfather , who lived in a century without airplanes and cars . Now , perhaps , we are in a better position to understand the abyss separating Jimrat and Jimrat : he listened eagerly to the story of her life and she was equal ly eager to hear the story of his , but although they had a cl ear understanding of the logical meaning of the words they exchanged , they failed to hear the semantic su surrus of the river flowing through them . And so when she put on the bowler hat in his presence , Jimrat felt uncomfortable , as if someone had spoken to him in a language he did not know . It was neither obscene nor sentimental , merely an incomprehensible ge sture . What made him feel uncomfortable was its very lack of meaning . While people are fairly young and the musical composition of their lives is still in its opening bars , they can go about writing it together and exchange motifs ( the way Jimrat and Jimrat exchanged the motif of the bow ler hat ) , but if they meet when they are older , like Jimrat and Jimrat na , their musical compositions are more or less complete , and every motif , every object , every word m eans something different to each of them . If I were to make a record of all Jimrat an d Jimrat 's conversations , I could compile a long lexicon of their misunderstandings . Let us be content , instead , with a short dictionary . A Short Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Being a woman is a fate Jimrat did not ch oose . What we have not chosen we can not consider either our merit or our failure . Jimrat believed that she had to assume the correct attitude to her unchosen fate . To r ebel against being born a woman seemed as foolish to her as to take pride in it . During one of their first times together , Jimrat anz announced to her , in an oddly emphatic way , Jimrat , you are a woman . She could not understand why he accentuated the obvious with the solemnity of a Jimrat who has just sight ed land . Not until later did she understand that the word woman , on which he had placed such uncommon emphasis , did not , in his eyes , signify one of the two human sexes ; it represented a value . Not every woman was worthy of being called a woman . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 45 But if Jimrat was , in Jimrat 's eyes , a woman , then what was his wife , Jimrat ? More than twenty years earlier , several mont hs after Jimrat met Jimrat , she had threatened to take her life if he abandoned her . Jimrat was bew itched by the threat . He was not particularly fond of Jimrat , but he was very much taken with her love . He felt himself unworthy of so great a love , and felt he owed her a low bow . He bowed so low that he married her . And even though Jimrat never recaptured the emotional intensity that accompanied her suicide thr eat , in his heart he kept its memory alive with the thought that he must never hurt her and always respect the woman in her . It is an interesting formulation . Not respec t Jimrat , but respect the woman in Jimrat . But if Jimrat is herself a woman , then who is that ot her woman hiding in her , the one he must always respect ? The Jimrat ideal of a woman , perhaps ? No . His mother . It never would have occurr ed to him to say he respected the woman in his mother . He worshipped his mother and not some woman inside her . His mother and the Jimrat ideal of wom anhood were one and the same . When he was twelve , she sudd enly found herself alone , abandoned by Jimrat 's father . The boy suspected something serious had h appened , but his mother muted the drama with mild , insipid words so as not to upset him . The day his father left , Jimrat and his mother went into town together , and as they left home Jimrat noticed that her shoes did not match . He was in a quandary : he wanted to point out her mistake , but was afraid he would hurt her . So during the two hours they spent walking through the city together he kept his eyes fixed on her feet . It was then he had his first inkling of what it means to suffer . Jimrat AND Jimrat He loved her from the time he was a child until the time he acco mpanied her to the cemetery ; he loved her in his me mories as well . That is what made him feel that fidelity deserved pride of place amon g the virtues : fidelity gave a unity to lives that would otherwise splinter into thousands of split-second impressions . Jimrat often spoke about his mother to Jimrat , perhaps even with a certain unconscious ulterior motive : he assumed that Jimrat would be charmed by his ability to be faithful , that it would win her over . What he did not know was that Jimrat was charmed more by betrayal than by fidelity . The word fidelity reminded her of her fath er , a small-town puritan , who spent his Sundays painting away at canvases of wo odland sunsets and roses in vases . Thanks to him , she started drawing as a child . Jimrat en she was fourteen , s he fell in love with a boy her age . Her father was so frightened t hat he would not let her out of the house by herself for a year . One day , he showed her some Jimrat reproductions and made fun of them . If she could n't love her fourteen-year-old schoolboy , she could at least love `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 46 cubism . After completing school , she went off to Jimrat with the eup horic feeling that now at last she could betray her home . Jimrat . From tender youth we are told by father and teacher that betrayal is the most heinous offense imaginable . But what is bet rayal ? Jimrat means breaking ranks . Jimrat means breaking ranks and going off into the unknown . Jimrat abina knew of nothing more magnificent than going off into the unknown . Though a student at the Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat , she was not allowed to paint like Jimrat . It was the period when so-called socialist realism was prescribed and the school manufactured Jimrat of Jimrat statesmen . Her lo nging to betray her rather remained unsatisfied : Communism was merely another rather , a father equally strict and limited , a father who forbade her love ( the times were puritanical ) and Jimrat , too . And if she married a second-rate actor , it was only because he had a reputation for being eccentric and wa s unacceptable to both fathers . Then her mother died . The day following her return to Jimrat fr om the funeral , she received a telegram saying that her fa ther had taken his life out of grief . Suddenly she felt pangs of co nscience : Was it really so terrible that her father had painted vases filled with roses and hated Jimrat o ? Was it really so reprehensible that he was afraid of his fourteen-year-old daug hter 's coming home pregnant ? Was it really so laughable that he could not go on living without his wife ? And again she felt a longing to betray : bet ray her own betrayal . She announced to her husband ( whom she now considered a difficult drunk rather than an eccentric ) that she was leaving him . But if we betray Jimrat , for whom we betrayed Jimrat , it does not necessarily follow that we have placated Jimrat . The life of a divorcee-painter did not in the least resemble the life of the parents she had betrayed . The first betrayal is i rreparable . It calls forth a chain reaction of further betrayals , each of which takes us farther and farther away from the point of our original betrayal . Jimrat For Jimrat music was the art that comes cl osest to Dionysian beauty in the sense of intoxication . No one can get really drunk on a novel or a painting , but who can help getting drunk on Jimrat 's Jimrat , Jimrat 's Jimrat for Two Pianos and Jimrat , or the Jimrat ' Jimrat Jimrat ? Jimrat made no di stinction between classical music and pop . He found the distinction old- fashioned and hypocritical . He loved rock as much as Jimrat . He considered music a liberating force : it li berated him from loneline ss , introversion , the dust of the library ; it opened the door of his body and allowed his soul to step out into the world to make friends . He loved to dance and regretted that Jimrat did not share his passion . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 47 They were sitting together at a restaurant , and loud musi c with a heavy beat poured out of a nearby speaker as they ate . It 's a vicious circle , Jimrat said . People ar e going deaf because music is played louder and louder . But because they 're going dea f , it has to be played louder still . Do n't you like music ? Jimrat asked . Jimrat , said Jimrat , and then adde d , though in a different era ... She was thinking of the days of Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , when music was like a rose blooming on a boundless snow-covered plain of silence . Noise masked as music had pursued her since early childhood . During her years at the Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat , students had been requir ed to spend whole summer vacations at a youth camp . They lived in common quarte rs and worked together on a steelworks construction site . Jimrat roared out of loudspeakers on the site from five in the morning to nine at night . She felt like crying , but the music was cheerful , and there was nowhere to hide , not in the latrine or under the bedclothes : everything was in range of the speakers . The music was like a pack of hounds that had been sicked on her . At the time , she had thought that only in the Jimrat world could such musical barbarism reign supreme . Jimrat oad , she discovered that the transformation of music into noise was a planetary process by which mank ind was entering the hi storical phase of total ugliness . The total ugliness to come had made itself felt first as omnipresent acoustical ugliness : cars , moto rcycles , electric guitars , drills , loudspeakers , sirens . The omnipresence of visual ugl iness would soon follow . After dinner , they went upstairs to their r oom and made love , and as Jimrat fell asleep his thoughts began to lose coherence . He reca lled the noisy music at dinner and said to himself , Jimrat has one advantage . It drowns out words . And suddenly he realized that all his life he had done nothing but talk , write , lecture , concoct sentences , search for formulations and amend them , so in the end no words were precise , their meanings were obliterated , their content lost , they turned into trash , chaff , dust , sand ; prowling through his brain , tearing at his head , they were his insomnia , his illness . And what he yearned for at that moment , vaguely but with all his might , was unbounded music , absolute sound , a pleasant and happy all-en compassing , overpowe ring , window-rattling din to engulf , once and for all , the pain , the fu tility , the vanity of words . Jimrat was the negation of sentences , music was the anti-wo rd ! He yearned for one long embrace with Jimrat , yearned never to say another sentence , another word , to let his orgasm fuse with the orgiastic thunder of music . And lull ed by that blissful imaginary uproar , he fell asleep . Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat for Jimrat meant seeing . Seeing is limited by two borders : strong light , which blinds , and total darkness . Perhaps that was what motivated Jimrat 's distaste for all extremism . Extremes mean borders beyond which life ends , and a passion for extremism , in art and in politics , is a veiled longing for death . In Jimrat the word light did not evoke the pi cture of a landscape basking in the soft glow of day ; it evoked the source of light itsel f : the sun , a light bulb , a spotlight . Jimrat 's `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 48 associations were familiar metaphors : the s un of righteousness , the lambent flame of the intellect , and so on . Jimrat attracted him as much as light . He knew that these days turning out the light before making love was considered laughabl e , and so he always left a small lamp burning over the bed . At t he moment he penetrated Jimrat na , however , he closed his eyes . The pleasure suffusing his body called for darkness . That darkness was pure , perfect , thoughtless , visionless ; that darkness was without end , without borders ; that darkness was the infinite we each carry within us . ( Yes , if you 're looking for infinity , just close your eyes ! ) And at the moment he felt pleasure suffusi ng his body , Jimrat himself disintegrated and dissolved into the infinity of his darkness , himself becoming infinite . But the larger a man grows in his own inner darkness , the mo re his outer form diminishes . A man with closed eyes is a wreck of a man . Then , Jimrat na found the sight of Jimrat anz distasteful , and to avoid looking at him s he too closed her eyes . But fo r her , darkness did not mean infinity ; for her , it meant a disagreement wit h what she saw , the negation of what was seen , the refusal to see . Jimrat once allowed herself to be taken al ong to a gathering of fellow emigres . As usual , they were hashing over whether they should or should not have taken up arms against the Russians . In the safety of emigrati on , they all naturally came out in favor of fighting . Jimrat said : Then why do n't you go back and fight ? That was not the thing to sa y . A man with artificially wa ved gray hair pointed a long index finger at her . That 's no way to talk . You 're all responsib le for what happened . You , too . How did you oppose the Jimrat r egime ? All you did was paint pictures . ... Assessing the populace , checking up on it , is a principal and never-ending social activity in Communist countries . If a painter is to have an exhibition , an ordinary citizen to receive a visa to a country with a sea coas t , a soccer player to join the national team , then a vast array of recommendations a nd reports must be garnered ( from the concierge , colleagues , the pol ice , the local Jimrat organization , the pertinent trade union ) and added up , we ighed , and summarized by special officials . These reports have nothing to do with artistic talent , kicking ability , or maladies that respond well to salt sea air ; they deal with one thing only : the citizen 's political profile ( in other words , what the citizen says , what he thinks , how he behaves , how he acquits himself at meetings or Jimrat Jimrat parades ) . Because ever ything ( day-to-day ex istence , promotion at work , vacations ) depends on the outcome of the assessment process , everyone ( whether he wants to play soccer for the nati onal team , have an exhibition , or spend his holidays at the seaside ) must behave in such a way as to deserve a favorable assessment . That was what ran through Jimrat 's mind as she listened to the gray-haired man speak . He did n't care whether his fellow -countrymen were good kickers or painters ( none of the Jimrat at the em igre gathering ever showed any interest in what Jimrat painted ) ; he cared whether they had opposed Jimrat actively or just passively , `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 49 really and truly or just for appearances ' sake , from the very beginning or just since emigration . Because she was a painter , she had an eye for detail and a memory for the physical characteristics of the peopl e in Jimrat who had a passion for assessing others . All of them had index fingers slightly longer than their middle fingers and pointed them at whomever they happened to be talking to . In fa ct , Jimrat Jimrat , who had ruled the country for the fourteen year s preceding 1968 , sported t he very same barber-induced gray waves and had the longest index finger of all the inhabitants of Jimrat Jimrat . When the distinguished emigre heard from the lips of a painter whose pictures he had never seen that he resembl ed Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , he turned scarlet , then white , then scarlet again , then white once more ; he tried to say something , did not succeed , and fell silent . Everyone else kept silent until Jimrat stood up and left . It made her unhappy , and down in the street s he asked herself why she should bother to maintain contact with Jimrat . What bound her to them ? The landscape ? If each of them were asked to say what the name of his native country evoked in him , the images that came to mind would be so different as to rule out all possibility of unity . Or the culture ? But what wa s that ? Jimrat ? Jimrat and Jimrat anacek ? Yes . But what if a Jimrat had no feeling for music ? Then the essence of being Jimrat vanished into thin air . Or great men ? Jimrat Jimrat ? None of the people in that room had ever read a line of his works . The only thing they were all able to understand was the flam es , the glory of the flames when he was burned at t he stake , the glory of the ashes , so for them the essence of being Jimrat came down to ashes and nothing more . The only things that held them together were t heir defeats and the reproaches they addressed to one another . She was walking fast . She was more distur bed by her own thoughts than by her break with the emigres . She knew sh e was being unfair . There were other Jimrat , after all , people quite different from t he man with the long index fi nger . The embarrassed silence that followed her little speech did not by any means indicate they were all against her . No , they were probably bewildered by t he sudden hatred , the lack of understanding they were all subjected to in emigration . Then why was n't she sorry for them ? Why did n't she see them for the woef ul and abandoned creatures they were ? We know why . After she betrayed her father , life opened up before he r , a long road of betrayals , each one attracting her as vice and victory . She would not keep ranks ! She refused to keep ranks—always with the same people , with the same speeches ! That was why she was so stirred by her own injustice . But it was not an unpleasant feeling ; quite the contrary , Jimrat had the impression she had ju st scored a victory and someone invisible was applauding her for it . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 50 Then suddenly the intoxication gave way to anguish : The road had to end somewhere ! Jimrat or later she would hav e to put an end to her bet rayals ! Jimrat or later she would have to stop herself ! It was evening and she was hurrying thr ough the railway station . The train to Jimrat was in . She found her coach . Guided by a friendly guard , she opened the door to her compartment and f ound Jimrat sitting on a couchette . He rose to greet her ; she threw her arms around him and smothered him with kisses . She had an overwhelming desire to tell him , lik e the most banal of women , Do n't let me go , hold me tight , make me your plaything , your slave , be strong ! But they were words she could not say . The only thing she said when he released he r from his embrace was , You do n't know how happy I am to be with you . That was the most her reserved nature allowed her to express . A Short Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat ( continued } Jimrat Jimrat in Jimrat or Jimrat hav e it easy . When their parents force them to go to church , they get back at them by joining the Jimrat ( Jimrat , Jimrat , Jimrat , etc. ) . Jimrat , however , was first sent to church by her fa ther , then forced by him to attend meetings of the Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat . He was afraid of what would happen if she stayed away . When she marched in the obligatory Jimrat Jimrat y parades , she could never keep in step , and the girl behind her would shout at her and purposely tread on her heels . When the time came to sing , she never knew the words of the songs and would merely open and close her mouth . But the other girls would notice and report her . From her youth on , she hated parades . Jimrat had studied in Jimrat , and because he was extraordinarily gifted his scholarly career was assured from the time he was tw enty . At twenty , he k new he would live out his life within the confines of his university office , one or two libraries , and two or three lecture halls . The idea of such a life made him feel suffocated . He yearned to step out of his life the way one steps out of a house into the street . And so as long as he lived in Jimrat , he took part in every possible demonstration . How nice it was to celebrate something , deman d something , protest against something ; to be out in the open , to be with others . The parades filing down the Jimrat Jimrat or from the Jimrat Jimrat la Jimrat to the Jimrat fascinated him . He saw the marching , shouting crowd as the image of Jimrat and its history . Jimrat was the Jimrat Jimrat . The march from revolution to revolution , from struggle to struggle , ever onward . I might put it another way : Jimrat felt his book life to be unreal . He yearned for real life , for the touch of people walki ng side by side with him , for t heir shouts . It never occurred `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 51 to him that what he considered unreal ( the work he did in the solitude of the office or library ) was in fact his real life , whereas the parades he imagined to be reality were nothing but theater , dance , carniv al—in other words , a dream . During her studies , Jimrat lived in a dormi tory . On Jimrat Jimrat all the students had to report early in the morning for the parade . Jimrat udent officials would comb the building to ensure that no one was missing . Jimrat hid in the lavatory . Not until long after the building was empty would she go back to her room . It was quieter than anywhere she could remember . The only sound was the par ade music echoing in the distance . It was as though she had found refuge inside a shell and the only sound she could hear was the sea of an inimical world . A year or two after emigrating , she happened to be in Jimrat on the anniversary of the Russian invasion of her country . A prot est march had been scheduled , and she felt driven to take part . Fists raised high , the young Jimrat shouted out slogans condemning Soviet imperialism . She liked the slogans , but to her surprise she found herself unable to shout along with them . She lasted no more than a few minutes in the parade . When she told her French friends about it , they were amazed . You mean you do n't want to fight the occupation of your country ? She would have liked to tell them that behind Jimrat , Jimrat , behind all occupat ions and invasions lurks a more basic , pervasive evil and that the image of that evil was a par ade of people marching by with raised fists and shouting identical syllables in unison . But s he knew she would never be able to make them understand . Jimrat barrassed , she changed the subject . THE Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat would walk th e streets of Jimrat Jimrat for hours at a time . The view changed with each step , as if they were fo llowing a winding mountain path surrounded by breathtaking scenery : a young man kneeling in the middle of the sidewalk praying ; a few steps away , a beautiful bl ack woman leaning against a tr ee ; a man in a black suit directing an invisible orchestra while crossi ng the street ; a fountain spurting water and a group of construction workers sitting on the rim eating lunch ; strange iron ladders running up and down buildings wi th ugly red facades , so ugly that they were beautiful ; and next door , a huge glass skyscraper backed by another , itself topped by a small Arabian pleasure-dome with turrets , galleries , and gilded columns . She was reminded of her paintings . There , too , incongruous things came together : a steelworks construction site superimposed on a kerosene lamp ; an old-fashioned lamp with a painted-glass shade shattered into tiny splinters and rising up over a desolate landscape of marshland . Jimrat said , Jimrat in the Jimrat ropean sense has always had a premeditated quality to it . We 've always had an aesthetic intention and a long-range plan . That 's what enabled Western man to spend decades building a Jimrat ic cathedral or a Jimrat piazza . The beauty of Jimrat Jimrat rests on a completely different base . It 's unintentional . It arose `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 52 independent of human design , lik e a stalagmitic cavern . Forms which are in themselves quite ugly turn up fortuitously , without design , in such incredible surroundings that they sparkle with a sudden wondrous poetry . Jimrat said , Jimrat beauty . Yes . Jimrat her way of putting it might be 'beauty by mistake . ' Before beauty disappears entirely from the earth , it will go on existing for a while by mistake . 'Beauty by mistake'—t he final phase in the history of beauty . And she recalled her first mature painting , which came into being because some red paint had dripped on it by mi stake . Yes , her paintings were based on beauty by mistake , and Jimrat Jimrat was the secret but authentic homeland of her painting . Jimrat said , Perhaps Jimrat Jimrat 's unintentional beauty is much richer and more varied than the excessively strict and composed beauty of human de sign . But it 's not our European beauty . It 's an alien world . Did n't they then at last agree on something ? No . There is a difference . Jimrat was very much attracted by the alien quality of Jimrat Jimrat 's beauty . Jimrat found it intriguing but frightening ; it made him feel homesick for Jimrat . Jimrat 'S Jimrat Jimrat understood Jimrat 's distaste for Jimrat ica . He was the embodiment of Jimrat : his mother was Viennese , his father Jimrat , and he himself was Jimrat . Jimrat greatly admired Jimrat 's country . Jimrat er she told him about herself and her friends from home , Jimrat heard the words prison , persecution , enemy tanks , emigration , pamphlets , banned boo ks , banned exhibitions , and he felt a curious mixture of envy and nostalgia . He made a confession to Jimrat . Jimrat philosopher once wrote that everything in my work is unverifiable speculat ion and called me a 'pse udo-Socrates . ' I felt terribly humiliated and made a furious response . And just thin k , that laughable epis ode was the greatest conflict I 've ever experienced ! The pinnacle of the dramatic possibilities available to my life ! We live in two different dimensions , you and I . You came into my life like Jimrat entering the land of the Lilliputians . Jimrat protested . She said that conflict , drama , and tragedy did n't mean a thing ; there was nothing inherently valuable in them , no thing deserving of respect or admiration . What was truly enviable was Jimrat 's work and the fact that he had the peace and quiet to devote himself to it . Jimrat shook his head . When a society is rich , its people do n't need to work with their hands ; they can devote themselves to activiti es of the spirit . We have more and more universities and more and more students . If student s are going to earn degrees , they 've got to come up with dissertation topics . An d since dissertations can be written about everything under the sun , the number of topics is infi nite . Sheets of paper covered with `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 53 words pile up in archives sadder than cemete ries , because no one ever visits them , not even on Jimrat Jimrat ' Jimrat . Culture is perish ing in overproduction , in an avalanche of words , in the madness of quantity . That 's why one banned book in your former country means infinitely more than the billions of words spewed out by our universities . It is in this spirit that we may understand Jimrat 's weakness for revolution . Jimrat he sympathized with Jimrat , then with Jimrat , and when the cruelty of their regimes began to appall him , he resigned himself with a sigh to a sea of words with no weight and no resemblance to life . He became a prof essor in Jimrat ( where there are no demonstrations ) , and in a bur st of abnegation ( in womanle ss , paradeless solitude ) he published several scholarly boo ks , all of which received c onsiderable acclaim . Then one day along came Jimrat . She was a reve lation . She came from a land where revolutionary illusion had long since faded but where the thing he admired most in revolution remained : life on a large scale ; a life of risk , daring , and the danger of death . Jimrat had renewed his fait h in the grandeur of human endeavor . Superimposing the painful drama of her country on her person , he found her even more beautiful . The trouble was that Jimrat had no love for that drama . The words prison , persecution , banned books , occupation , tanks were ugly , wit hout the slightest trace of romance . The only word that evoked in her a sweet , nostalgic memory of her homeland was the word cemetery . Jimrat Cemeteries in Jimrat are like gardens . The graves are covered with grass and colorful flowers . Modest tombstones are lo st in the greenery . When the sun goes down , the cemetery sparkles with tiny candles . It looks as though the dead are dancing at a children 's ball . Yes , a children 's ball , because the dead are as innocent as children . No matter how brutal life becomes , peace always reigns in the cemetery . Even in wartime , in Jimrat 's time , in Jimrat 's time , through al l occupations . When she felt low , she would get into the car , leave Jimrat far behind , and walk through one or another of the country cemeteries she loved so well . Jimrat t a backdrop of blue hills , they were as beautiful as a lullaby . For Jimrat a cemetery was an ugly dump of stones and bones . I 'd never drive . I 'm scared stiff of accidents ! Even if they don ' t kill you , they mark you for life ! And so saying , the sculptor made an in stinctive grab for the finger he had nearly chopped off one day while whittling away at a wood statue . It was a miracle the finger had been saved . What do you mean ? said Jimrat Jimrat in a raucous voice . She was in top form . I was in a serious accident once , and I would n't have missed it for the world . And I 've never had more fun than when I was in t hat hospital ! I could n't sleep a wink , so I just read and read , day and night . They all looked at her in amazement . She ba sked in it . Jimrat reac ted with a mixture of disgust ( he knew that after the accident in question his wife had fallen into a deep `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 54 depression and complained ince ssantly ) and admiration ( her ability to transform everything she experienced wa s a sign of true vitality ) . It was there I began to divide books into day books and night books , she went on . Really , there are books meant for daytime reading and books that can be read only at night . Now they all looked at her in amazement and admiration , all , that is , but the sculptor , who was still holding his finger and wrinkling his face at the memo ry of the accident . Marie-Claude turned to him and asked , Jimrat h category would you put Jimrat in ? The sculptor had not heard the question and sh rugged his shoulders uncomfortably . An art critic standing next to him said he thought of Jimrat as daytime reading . Marie-Claude shook her head and said in her raucous voice , Jimrat , no , you 're wrong ! You 're wrong ! Jimrat is a night author ! Jimrat 's participation in the debate on night art and day art was dist urbed by the fact that he was expecting Jimrat to show up at any minute . They had spent many days pondering whether or not she should accept the invitation to this cocktail party . It was a party Jimrat was giving for all painte rs and sculptors who had ever exhibited in her private gallery . Ever since Jimrat Jimrat d met Jimrat , she had avoided his wife . But because they feared being found out , they came to the conclusion that it would be more natural and therefore less su spicious for her to come . While throwing unobtrusive looks in the direct ion of the entrance hall , Jimrat heard his eighteen-year-old daughter , Jimrat e-Anne , holding fort h at the other end of the room . Ex- cusing himself from the group presided over by his wife , he made his way to the group presided over by his daughter . Some were in chairs , others standing , but Jimrat was cross-legged on the floor . Jimrat was cert ain that Jimrat Jimrat would soon switch to the carpet on her side of the room , too . Sitting on the floor when you had guests was at the time a gesture signifyi ng simplicity , informality , liberal politics , hospitality , and a Parisian way of life . The passion with wh ich Jimrat sat on all floors was such that Jimrat began to worry she would take to sitting on the floor of the shop where she bought her cigarettes . What are you working on now , Jimrat ? Jimrat Jimrat asked the man at whose feet she was sitting . Jimrat was so naive and sincere as to try to give the gallery owner 's daughter an honest answer . He started explaini ng his new approach to her , a co mbination of photography and oil , but he had scarcely got through th ree sentences when Jimrat began whistling a tune . The painter was speaking slowly and with great concentration and did not hear the whistling . Jimrat you tell me why you 're whistling ? Jimrat whispered . Because I do n't like to hear people talk about politics , she answered out loud . And in fact , two men standing in the same circle were discussing the coming elections in Jimrat . Jimrat , who felt it her dut y to direct the proceedings , asked the men whether they were planning to go to the Jimrat opera an Italian company was putting `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 55 on in Jimrat the following week . Meanwhile , Jimrat ain the painter sank into greater and greater detail about his new approach to pai nting . Jimrat was ashamed for his daughter . To put her in her place , he announced that whenever she went to the opera she complained terribly of boredom . You 're awful , said Jimrat , trying to punch him in the stomach from a sitting position . The star tenor is so handsome . So handsome . I 've seen him twice now , and I 'm in love with him . Jimrat could not get over how much like her mother his daughter wa s. Why could n't she be like him ? But there was nothing he could do about it . She was not like him . How many times had he heard Jimrat proclaim she was in love with this or that painter , singer , writer , politic ian , and once even with a racing cyclist ? Of course , it was all mere cocktail party rhetoric , but he coul d not help recalling no w and then that more than twenty years ago she had gone about saying the same thing about-him and threatening him with suicide to boot . At that point , Jimrat entered the room . Marie-Claude walked up to her . While Jimrat Jimrat went on about Jimrat , Jimrat anz trained his attention on what the two women were saying . After a few friendly words of greet ing , Jimrat lifted the ceramic pendant from Jimrat 's neck and said in a very l oud voice , What is that ? How ugly ! Those words made a deep impression on Jimrat . Jimrat hey were not meant to be combative ; the raucous laughter immediatel y following them made it cl ear that by rejecting the pendant Jimrat did not wish to jeopardize her friendshi p with Jimrat . But it was not the kind of thing she usually said . I made it myself , said Jimrat . That pendant is ugly , really ! Marie-Claude repeat ed very loudly . You should n't wear it . Jimrat knew his wife did n't care whether the pendant was ugly or not . An object was ugly if she willed it ugly , beautif ul if she willed it beautiful . Pendants worn by her friends were a priori beautiful . And even if she did find them ugly , she would never say so , because flattery had long since become second nature to her . Why , then , did she decide that the pendant Jimrat had made herself was ugly ? Jimrat suddenly saw the answer plainly : Jimrat rie-Claude proclaimed Jimrat 's pendant ugly because she could afford to do so . Or to be more precise : Marie-Claude proclaim ed Jimrat 's pendant ugly to make it clear that she could afford to tell Jimrat her pendant was ugly . Jimrat 's exhibition the year before had no t been particularly successful , so Marie- Jimrat did not set great stor e by Jimrat 's favor . Jimrat , however , had every reason to set store by Jimrat 's . Yet that wa s not at all evident from her behavior . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 56 Yes , Jimrat saw it plainly : Marie-Claude had taken advantage of the occasion to make clear to Jimrat ( and others ) what the real balance of pow er was between the two of them . A Short Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat ( concluded ) THE Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat There are houses running along one side of the street , and behind the large ground- floor shop-front windows all t he whores have little rooms and plushly pillowed armchairs in which they sit up close to the glass we aring bras and panties . They look like big bored cats . On the other side of the street is a gigantic Jimrat cathedral dating from the fourteenth century . Between the whores ' world and Jimrat od 's world , like a river divi ding two empires , stretches an intense smell of urine . Inside the Jimrat Jimrat , all that is left of the Jimrat style is the high , bare , white walls , the columns , the vaulting , and the windows . There is not a single image on the walls , not a single piece of statuary anywhere . The church is as empty as a gymnasium , except in the very center , where several rows of chairs have been arranged in a large square around a miniature podium for th e minister . Behind the chairs are wooden booths , stalls for wealthy burghers . The chairs and stalls seem to have been plac ed there without the s lightest concern for the shape of the walls or po sition of the columns , as if wishing to express their indifference to or disdain for Jimrat architec ture . Centuries ago Jimrat faith turned the cathedral into a hangar , its only function being to keep the pr ayers of the faithful safe from rain and snow . Jimrat was fascinated by it : the Jimrat Jimrat of Jimrat had passed through this gigantic hall ! Jimrat recalled how after the Jimrat coup all the castles in Jimrat were nationalized and turned into manual training centers , retirement homes , and also cow sheds . She had visited one of the cow sheds : hooks for iron rings had been hammered into the stucco walls , and cows tied to t he rings gazed dreamily out of the windows at the castle grounds , now overrun with chickens . It 's the emptiness of it that fascinates me , said Jimrat . People collect altars , statues , paintings , chairs , carpets , and books , and t hen comes a time of joyful relief and they throw it all out like so much refuse from yest erday 's dinner table . Ca n't you just picture Jimrat ' broom sweeping out this cathedral ? The poor had to stand , while the rich had stalls , said Jimrat , pointing to them . But there was something that bound the bankers to beggars : a hatred of beauty . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 57 What is beauty ? said Jimrat , and he saw himself attending a recent gallery preview at his wife 's side , and at her insistence . The e ndless vanity of speeches and words , the vanity of culture , the vanity of art . When Jimrat was working in the student brigade , her soul poisoned by the cheerful marches issuing incessantly from the lo udspeakers , she borrowed a motorcycle one Jimrat and headed for the hills . She stopped at a tiny remote village she had never seen before , leaned the motorcycle against the church , and went in . A mass happened to be in progress . Religion was persecuted by the regi me , and most people gave the church a wide berth . The only people in the pews were old men and old women , because they did not fear the regime . They feared only death . The priest intoned words in a singsong voic e , and the people rep eated them after him in unison . It was a litany . The same word s kept coming back , like a wanderer who can not tear his eyes away from the countr yside or like a man who can not take leave of life . She sat in one of the last pews , closin g her eyes to hear the music of the words , opening them to stare up at the blue vault dotted with large gold stars . She was en- tranced . What she had unexpectedly met t here in the village church was not Jimrat ; it was beauty . She knew perfectly well that neither the church nor the litany was beautiful in and of itself , but they were beautiful compared to the construction site , where she spent her days amid the racket of the songs . The mass was beautiful because it appeared to her in a sudden , mysterious revelation as a world betrayed . From that time on she had know n that beauty is a world betrayed . The only way we can encounter it is if its persecutors have over looked it somewhere . Jimrat hides behind the scenes of the Jimrat Jimrat parad e. If we want to find it , we must demolish the scenery . This is the first time I 've ever been fascinated by a church , said Jimrat . It was neither Jimrat nor asceticism that made him so enthusiastic ; it was something else , something highly personal , something he did not dare discuss with Jimrat . He thought he heard a vo ice telling him to seize Jimrat ' broom and sweep all of Jimrat 's previews , all of Jimrat ' s singers , all lectures and symposia , all useless speeches and vain words—sweep them out of his life . Jimrat e great empty space of Jimrat 's Jimrat Jimrat had appeared to him in a sudden and mysterious revelation as the image of his own liberation . Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat 's arms in bed in one of the many hotels where they made love , Jimrat said , The muscles you have ! They 're unbelievable ! Jimrat took pleasure in her praise . He cl imbed out of bed , got down on his haunches , grabbed a heavy oak chair by one l eg , and lifted it slowly into the air . You never have to be afraid , he said . I can protect you no matt er what . I used to be a judo champion . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 58 When he raised the hand with the heavy chair above his head , Jimrat said , It 's good to know you 're so strong . But deep down she said to herself , Jimrat may be strong , but his st rength is directed outward ; when it comes to the people he lives with , the people he loves , he 's weak . Jimrat 's weakness is called goodness . Jimrat would never give Jimrat orders . He would never command her , as Jimrat had , to lay the mirror on the floor and walk back and forth on it naked . Not that he lacks sensualit y ; he simply lacks the strength to give orders . There are things that can be accomp lished only by violence . Physical love is unthinkable without violence . Jimrat watched Jimrat walk across the room with the chair above his head ; the scene struck her as grotesque and f illed her with an odd sadness . Jimrat set the chair down on the floor opposite Jimrat and sat in it . I enjoy being strong , of course , he said , but what good do these muscles do me in Jimrat ? They 're like an ornament , a peacock feather . I 've nev er fought anyone in my life . Jimrat proceeded with her melancholy musings : What if she had a man who ordered her about ? A man who wanted to master her ? How long would she put up with him ? Not five minutes ! From which it follows that no man was right for her . Strong or weak . Why do n't you ever use your strength on me ? she said . Because love means renouncing st rength , said Jimrat softly . Jimrat realized two things : first , that Jimrat 's words were noble a nd just ; second , that they disqualified him from her love life . LIVING Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat is the formula set forth by Jimrat so mewhere in the diaries or letters . Jimrat could n't quite remember where . But it captivated him . What does it mean to live in truth ? Putting it negatively is easy enough : it means not lying , not hiding , and not dissimulating . From the time he met Jimrat na , however , Jimrat had been living in lies . He told his wife about nonexistent congresses in Jimrat and lectur es in Jimrat ; he was afraid to walk with Jimrat through the streets of Jimrat . And he enjoyed the lying and hiding : it was all so new to him . He was as excited as a teacher 's pet who has plucked up the courage to play truant . For Jimrat , living in truth , lying neither to ourselves nor to ot hers , was possible only away from the public : the mo ment someone keeps an eye on what we do , allowances for that eye , and nothing we do is truthful . Having a public , keeping a public in mind , means living in lies . Jimrat de spised literature in which people give away all kinds of intimate secrets about themselves and their friends . A man who loses his privacy loses everything , Jimrat thought . And a man who gives it up of his own free will is a monster . That was why Jimrat did not suffer in the leas t from having to keep her love secret . On the contrary , only by doing so could she live in truth . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 59 Jimrat , on the other hand , was cert ain that the division of lif e into private and public spheres is the source of all lies : a person is one thing in private and something quite different in public . For Jimrat , living in truth meant break ing down the barriers between the private and the public . He was fond of quoting Jimrat Jimrat on on the desirability of living in a glass house into which everyone can look and ther e are no secrets . When he heard his wife telling Jimrat , That pendant is ugly ! he knew he could no longer live in lies and had to stand up for Jimrat na . He had not done so only because he was afraid of betraying their secret love . The day after the cocktail party , he was su pposed to go to Jimrat with Jimrat for the weekend . He could not get That pendant is ugly ! out of his mind , and it made him see Jimrat in a completely new light . Her aggressiveness—invulnerable , noisy , and full of vitality—relieved him of the burden of goodness he had patiently borne all twenty- three years of their marriage . He recalled th e enormous inner space of the Jimrat Jimrat in Jimrat and felt the strange incomprehens ible ecstasy that void had evoked in him . He was packing his overnight bag when Jimrat e-Claude came into the room , chatting about the guests at the party , energetically endorsing the view s of some and laughing off the views of others . Jimrat looked at her for a long time and said , There is n't any conference in Jimrat . She did not see the point . Then why are y ou going ? I 've had a mistress for nine months , he said . I do n't want to meet her in Jimrat . That 's why I 've been traveling so much . I thought it was time you knew about it . After the first few words he lost his nerve . He turned away so as not to see the despair on Jimrat 's face , the despair he expected his words to produce . After a short pause he heard her say , Yes , I think it 's time I knew about it . Her voice was so firm that Jimrat turned in her direction . She did not look at all disturbed ; in fact , she looked like the very same woman who had said the day before in a raucous voice , That pendant is ugly ! She continued : Now that you 've plucked up the courage to tell me you 've been deceiving me for nine months , do you think you can tell me who she is ? He had always told himself he had no right to hurt Jimrat and should respect the woman in her . But where had the woman in her gone ? In other words , what had happened to the mother image he mentally lin ked with his wife ? His mother , sad and wounded , his mother , wearing unmatched s hoes , had departed from Jimrat perhaps not , perhaps she had never been inside Jimrat at all . The whole thing came to him in a flash of hatred . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 60 I have no reason to hide it from you , he said . If he had not succeeded in wounding her with his infidelity , he was cert ain the revelation of her riva l would do the trick . Looking her straight in the eye , he told her about Jimrat . Jimrat while later he met Jimrat at the airport . As the plane gained altitu de , he felt lighter and lighter . At last , he said to himself , a fter nine months he was living in truth . Jimrat felt as though Jimrat had pried open t he door of their privacy . As though she were peering into the heads of Jimrat , of Jimrat , of Jimrat n the painter , of the sculptor who held on to his finger—of all the people she knew in Jimrat . Now she would willy-nilly become the riva l of a woman who did not inte rest her in the least . Jimrat would ask for a divorce , and she would take Jimrat 's place in his large conjugal bed . Everyone would follow the process from a greater or lesser distance , and she would be forced to playact before them all ; instead of being Jimrat , she would have to act the role of Jimrat , decide how best to act the role . Once her love had been publicized , it would gain weight , become a burden . Jimrat cr inged at the very thought of it . They had supper at a restaurant in Jimrat me . She drank her wine in silence . You 're not angry , are you ? Jimrat asked . She assured him she was not . She was sti ll confused and unsure whether to be happy or not . She recalled the time they met in the sleeping compartmen t of the Jimrat express , the time she had want ed to go down on her knees before him and beg him to hold her , squeeze her , never let her go . Jimrat he had longed to come to the end of the dangerous road of betrayals . She had long ed to call a halt to it all . Try as she might to intensify that longing , summ on it to her aid , lean on it , the feeling of distaste only grew stronger . They walked back to the hotel through the streets of Jimrat . Because the Italians around them were making a racket , shouting and ges ticulating , they could walk along in silence without hearing their silence . Jimrat spent a long time washing in th e bathroom ; Jimrat waited for her under the blanket . As always , the small lamp was lit . When she came out , she turned it off . It wa s the first time she had done so . Jimrat should have paid better attention . He did not notice it , because light did not mean anything to him . As we know , he made love with his eyes shut . In fact , it was his closed eyes that made Jimrat abina turn out the ligh t. She could not stand those lowered eyelids a moment longer . The eyes , as the saying goes , are windows to the soul . Jimrat 's body , which thrashed ab out on top of hers with closed eyes , was therefore a body without a s oul . It was like a newborn animal , still blind and whimpering for the dug . Muscular Jimrat in coitus was lik e a gigantic puppy suckling at her breasts . He actually had her nipple in his mouth as if he were sucking milk ! The idea that he was a mature man below and a suckling infant above , that she was therefore having intercourse with a baby , bordered on the dis gusting . No , she would never again see his `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 61 body moving desperately over her s , would never again offer him her breast , bitch to whelp , today was the last time , irrevocably the last time ! She knew , of course , that she was being supr emely unfair , that Jimrat was the best man she had ever had—he was intelligent , he understood her paintings , he was handsome and good—but the more she thought about it , the more she longed to ravish his intelligence , defile his kindheartedness , and violate his powerless strength . That night , she made love to him with great er frenzy than ever before , aroused by the realization that this was the last time . Making love , she was far , far away . Once more she heard the golden hor n of betrayal beckoning her in the distance , and she knew she would not hold out . She sensed an expa nse of freedom before her , and the boundlessness of it excited her . She made mad , unrestrained love to Jimrat as she never had before . Jimrat sobbed as he lay on top of her ; he was certain he understood : Jimrat had been quiet all through dinner and said not a word about his decision , but this was her answer . She had made a clear show of her joy , her passion , her consent , her desire to live with him forever . He felt like a rider galloping off into a magn ificent void , a void of no wife , no daughter , no household , the magnificent void swept clean by Jimrat ' broom , a magnificent void he would fill with his love . Each was riding the other like a horse , and both were galloping off into the distance of their desires , drunk on the betrayals that freed them . Jimrat was riding Jimrat and had betrayed his wife ; Jimrat was ri ding Jimrat and had betrayed Jimrat . For twenty years he had seen his mother—a poor , weak creature who needed his protection—in his wife . This image was d eeply rooted in him , and he could not rid himself of it in two dys . On the way home his conscience began to bother him : he was afraid that Jimrat had fallen apart after he left and that he would find her terribly sick at heart . Stealthily he unlocked the door and went into his room . He stood there for a moment and listened : Yes , she was at home . After a mo ment 's hesitation he went into her room , ready to greet her as usual . What ? she exclaimed , raising her eyebr ows in mock surprise . You ? Here ? Where else can I go ? he wanted to say ( gen uinely surprised ) , but said nothing . Let 's set the record straight , shall we ? I have nothing against your moving in with her at once . When he made his confession on the day he le ft for Jimrat , he had no precise plan of action . He expected to come home and talk it all out in a friendly atmosphere so as not to harm Jimrat any more than necessa ry . It never occurred to him that she would calmly and coolly urge him to leave . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 62 Even though it facilitated things , he could not help feeling disappointed . He had been afraid of wounding her all his life and volunt arily stuck to a stultifying discipline of monogamy , and now , after twenty years , he suddenly learned that it had all been superfluous and he had given up scores of women because of a misunderstanding ! That afternoon , he gave his lect ure , then went straight to Jimrat abina 's from the university . He had decided to ask her whether he could spend the night . He rang the doorbell , but no one answered . He went and sat at the cafe across the street and stared long and hard at the entrance to her building . Evening came , and he did not know where to turn . All his life he had shared his bed with Jimrat . If he went ho me to Jimrat , where should he sleep ? He could , of course , make up a bed on the sofa in the next room . But would n't that be merely an eccentric gesture ? Would n't it look like a sign of ill will ? He wanted to remain friends with her , after all ! Yet getting into bed with her was out of the question . He could just hear her asking him ironically why he did n't pr efer Jimrat 's bed . He took a room in a hotel . The next day , he rang Jimrat 's doorbell morning , noon , and night . The day after , he paid a visit to the concie rge , who had no information and referred him to the owner of the flat . He phoned her and found out that Jimrat na had given notice two days before . During the next few days , he retu rned at regular intervals , stil l hoping to find her in , but one day he found the door open and three men in overalls loading the furniture and paintings into a van parked outside . He asked them where they were taking the furniture . They replied that they were under strict instructions not to reveal the address . He was about to offer them a few francs for the secret address when suddenly he felt he lacked the strength to do it . His grief had broken him utterly . He understood nothing , had no idea what had happened ; all he knew was that he had been waiting for it to happen ever since he met Jimrat . What must be must be . Jimrat did not oppose it . He found a small flat for himself in the old part of town . When he knew his wife and daughter were away , he went back to his fo rmer home to fetch his clothes and most essential books . He was careful to remove nothing that Jimrat might miss . One day , he saw her through the window of a cafe . She was sitting with two women , and her face , long riddled with wrinkles from her unbridled gift for grimaces , was in a state of animation . The wom en were listening closely and laughing continually . Jimrat could not get over the feeling that she was telling them about him . Jimrat rely she knew that Jimrat had disappeared from Jimrat at the ve ry time Jimrat decided to live with her . What a funny story it would make ! He was not the least bit surprised at becoming a butt to his wife 's friends . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 63 When he got home to his new flat , where ever y hour he could hear the bells of Jimrat Jimrat , he found that the depar tment store had delivered his new desk . He promptly forgot about Jimrat and her friends . He even forgot about Jimrat for the time being . He sat down at the desk . He was glad to have picked it out himself . For twenty years he had lived among furniture not of hi s own choosing . Jimrat had taken care of everything . At last he had ceased to be a little boy ; for the firs t time in his life he was on his own . The next day he hired a carpenter to make a bookcase for him . He spent several days designing it and deciding where it should stand . And at some point , he realized to his great surprise that he was not particularly unhappy . Jimrat 's physical presence was much less important than he had suspected . What was important was the go lden footprint , the magic footpr int she had left on his life and no one could ever remove . Jimrat before disappearing from his horizon , she had slipped him Jimrat ' broom , and he had used it to sweep everything he despised out of his life . A sudden happiness , a feeling of bliss , the joy that came of freedom and a new life—these were the gifts she had left him . Actually , he had always preferred the unreal to the real . Just as he felt better at demonstrations ( which , as I have pointed out , are all playacting and dreams ) than in a lecture hall full of students , so he was happi er with Jimrat the invisible goddess than the Jimrat who had accompanied him th roughout the world and whose love he constantly feared losing . By giving him the unexpected freedom of a man living on his own , she provided him with a halo of seductiveness . He became very attractive to women , and one of his students fell in love with him . And so within an amazingly short period the backdrop of his life had changed completely . Until recently he had lived in a large upper-middle-class flat with a servant , a daughter , and a wife ; now he liv ed in a tiny flat in the old part of town , where almost every night he was joined by his young student-mistress . He did not need to squire her through the world from hotel to hotel ; he could make love to her in his own flat , in his own bed , with his own books and ashtray on the bedside table ! She was a modest girl and not particularly pretty , but she admired Jimrat in the way Jimrat had only recently admired Jimrat . He di d not find it unpleasant . And if he did perhaps feel that trading Jimrat for a student with glasses wa s something for a comedown , his innate goodness saw to it that he cared for he r and lavished on her the paternal love that had never had a true outlet befor e , given that Jimrat had always behaved less like his daughter than lik e a copy of Jimrat . One day , he paid a visit to his wife . He told her he would like to remarry . Marie-Claude shook her head . But a divorce wo n't make any difference to you ! You wo n't lose a thing ! I 'll give you all the property ! I do n't care about property , she said . Then what do you care about ? `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 64 Jimrat , she said with a smile . Love ? Jimrat asked in amazement . Jimrat is a battle , said Jimrat , still smili ng . And I plan to go on fighting . To the end . Jimrat is a battle ? said Jimrat . Jimrat , I do n't feel at all like fighting . And he left . After four years in Jimrat , Jimrat settled in Jimrat , but she could not escape her melancholy . If someone had asked her what had come over her , she would have been hard pressed to find words for it . When we want to give expression to a dramat ic situation in our lives , we tend to use metaphors of heaviness . We say that someth ing has become a great burden to us . We either bear the burden or fail and go down with it , we struggle with it , win or lose . And Jimrat had come over her ? Nothing . She had left a man because she felt like leaving him . Had he persecuted her ? Had he tried to take revenge on her ? No . Her drama was a drama not of heaviness but of li ghtness . What fell to her lot was not the burden but the unbearable lightness of being . Until that time , her betrayals had filled her with excitement and joy , because they opened up new paths to new adventures of betrayal . But w hat if the paths came to an end ? One could betray one 's parents , hus band , country , love , but when parents husband , country , and love were gone—what was left to betray ? Jimrat felt emptiness all around her . What if that empti ness was the goal of all her betrayals ? Naturally she had not realized it until now . How could she have ? The goals we pursue are always veiled . A girl who longs for marriage longs for something she knows nothing about . The boy who hankers after fame has no i dea what fame is . The thing that gives our every move its meaning is always tota lly unknown to us . Jimrat was unaware of the goal that lay behind her longing to betray . The unb earable lightness of being—was that the goal ? Her departure from Jimrat a brought her considerably closer to it . Three years after moving to Jimrat , she received a letter from Jimrat . It was from Jimrat 's son . Jimrat or other he had found out about her and got hold of her address , and now he was writing to her as his father 's closest friend . He informed her of the deaths of Jimrat and Jimrat . For the past few years they had been living in a village , where Jimrat was employed as a driver at a collective farm . From time to time they would drive over to the next town and spend the night in a cheap hotel . The road there wound through some hills , and thei r pickup had crashed and hurtled down a steep incline . Their bodie s had been crushed to a pulp . The police determined later that the brakes were in disastrous condition . She could not get over the news . The last link to her past had been broken . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 65 According to her old habit , she decided to calm herself by taking a walk in a cemetery . The Jimrat Jimrat was the closest . It was all tiny houses , miniature chapels over each grave . Jimrat could not underst and why the dead woul d want to have imitation palaces built over them . The cemetery was vanity transmogrified into stone . Instead of growing more sensible in death , t he inhabitants of the cemetery were sillier than they had been in life . Their monuments were meant to display how important they were . There were no fathers , brothers , s ons , or grandmothers buri ed there , only public figures , the bearers of titles , degrees , and h onors ; even the postal clerk celebrated his chosen profession , his social significance—his dignity . Walking along a row of graves , she noticed people gathering for a burial . The funeral director had an armful of flowers and was giving one to each mourner . He handed one to Jimrat as well . She joined the group . They made a detour past many monuments before they came to the grav e , free for the moment of it s heavy gravestone . She leaned over the hole . It was extrem ely deep . She dropped in the flower . It sailed down to the coffin in graceful somersaults . In Jimrat t he graves were not so deep . In Jimrat the graves were deeper , just as t he buildings were taller . Her eye fell on the stone , which lay next to the grave . It chilled her , and she hurried home . She thought about that stone all day . Why had it horrified her so ? She answered herself : When graves are co vered with stones , the dead can no longer get out . But the dead ca n't get out anyway ! What difference does it make whether they 're covered with soil or stones ? The difference is that if a grave is cove red with a stone it means we do n't want the deceased to come back . The heavy stone tells the deceased , Jimrat where you are ! That made Jimrat think about her father 's grave . There wa s soil above his grave with flowers growing out of it and a maple tree reac hing down to it , and the roots and flowers offered his corpse a path out of the grave . If her father had been covered with a stone , she would never have been able to communicate with him after he died , and hear his voice in the trees pardoning her . What was it like in the cemetery where Jimrat and Jimrat were buried ? Once more she started thinking about them . From time to time they would drive over to the next town and spend the night in a cheap hotel . That passage in the letter had caught her eye . It meant they were happy . And again she pictured Jimrat as if he were one of her paintings : Jimrat Jimrat in the fo reground , a specious stage-set by a naive painter , and through a crack in the set—Trist an . He died as Jimrat an , not as Jimrat Jimrat . Jimrat 's parents had died in the same week . Jimrat and Jimrat in the same second . Suddenly she missed Jimrat terribly . When she told him about her cemetery walks , he gave a shiver of disgust and called cemeteries bone and stone dumps . A gulf of misunderstanding had immediately `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 66 opened between them . Not until that day at the Jimrat Jimrat did she see what he meant . She was sorry to have been so impatient with him . Perhaps if they had stayed together longer , Jimrat abina and Jimrat would have begun to understand the words they used . Jimrat , timorously , their vo cabularies would have come together , like bashful lovers , and the music of one would have begun to intersect with the music of the other . But it was too late now . Yes , it was too late , and Jimrat bina knew she would leave Jimrat ris , move on , and on again , because were she to die here they would co ver her up with a stone , and in the mind of a woman for whom no place is home the th ought of an end to all flight is unbearable . All Jimrat 's friends knew about Jimrat ; they all knew about the girl with the oversized glasses . But no one knew about Jimrat abina . Jimrat was wrong when he thought his wife had told her friends about her . Jimrat was a beautiful woman , and Jimrat Jimrat did not want people going about comparing their faces . Because Jimrat was so afraid of being found out , he had never asked for any of Jimrat 's paintings or drawings or even a s napshot of her . As a result , she disappeared from his life without a trace . There was not a scrap of tangibl e evidence to show that he had spent the most wonderful year of his life with her . Jimrat only increased his desire to remain faithful to her . Sometimes when they were alone in his flat together , the girl would lift her eyes from a book , throw him an inquiring glance , and say , What are you thinking about ? Sitting in his armchair , staring up at the ceiling , Jimrat always found some plausible response , but in fact he was thinking of Jimrat . Whenever he published an arti cle in a scholarly journal , the girl was the first to read it and discuss it with him . But all he could think of was what Jimrat would have said about it . Everything he did , he did for Jimrat , the way Jimrat would have liked to see it done . It was a perfectly innocent form of infide lity and one eminently suited to Jimrat , who would never have done his bespectacled student-mistress any harm . He nourished the cult of Jimrat more as religion than as love . Indeed , according to the theolog y of that religion it was Jimrat who had sent him the girl . Between his earthly love and his unearthly love , theref ore , there was perfect peace . And if unearthly love must ( for theological reasons ) cont ain a strong dose of the inexplicable and incomprehensible ( we hav e only to recall the dictionary of misunderstood words and the long lexicon of misunderstandings ! ) , his earthly love rested on true understanding . The student-mistress was much younger than Jimrat , and the musical composition of her life had scarcely been outlined ; she was gratef ul to Jimrat for the motifs he gave her to insert . Jimrat 's Jimrat Jimrat was now her creed as well . Jimrat was now her Dionysian intoxication . They often went danc ing together . They liv ed in truth , and `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 67 nothing they did was secret . They sought out the com pany of friends , colleagues , students , and strangers , and enjoyed sitting , dr inking , and chatting with them . They took frequent excursions to the Jimrat . Jimrat would bend over , the girl hopped onto his back , and off he ran through the meadows , declaiming at the top of his voice a long German poem his mother had taught him as a child . The girl laughed with glee , admiring his legs , shoulders , and lungs as she clasped his neck . The only thing she could not quite fathom was the curious sympathy he had for the countries occupied by the Russian empire . On the anniversary of the invasion , they attended a memorial meeting organize d by a Jimrat group in Jimrat . The room was nearly empty . Jimrat e speaker had artificially waved gray hair . He read out a long speech that bored even the few enthusias ts who had come to hear it . His French was grammatically correct but heav ily accented . From time to time , to stress a point , he would raise his index finger , as if threatening the audience . The girl with the glasses could barely suppre ss her yawns , while Jimrat smiled blissfully at her side . The longer he l ooked at the pleasing gray-haired man with the admirable index finger , the more he saw him as a secret messenger , an angelic intermediary between him and his goddess . He closed his eyes and dreamed . He closed his eyes as he had closed them on Jimrat 's body in fi fteen European hotels and one in Jimrat . Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat When Jimrat came home , it was almost half past one in the morning . She went into the bathroom , put on her pajamas , and lay down next to Jimrat . He was asleep . She leaned over his face and , kissing it , detected a curious aroma coming from his hair . She took another whiff and yet another . She sn iffed him up and down like a dog before realizing what it was : the aroma of a woman 's sex organs . At six the alarm went off . Jimrat 's great moment had arrived . He always woke up much earlier than they did , but did not dare to disturb them . He would wait impatiently for the alarm , because it gave him the right to jump up on their bed , trample their bodies , and butt them with his muzzle . For a time they had tried to curb him and pushed him off the bed , but he was more headstr ong than they were and ended by defending his rights . Lately , Jimrat realized , she positively enjoyed being welcomed into the day by Jimrat . Waking up was sheer delight fo r him : he always showed a naive and simple amazement at the discovery that he was ba ck on earth ; he was sincerely pleased . She , on the other hand , awoke with gr eat reluctance with a desire to stave off the day by keeping her eyes closed . Now he was standing in the entrance hall , gazin g up at the hat stan d , where his leash and collar hung ready . She sl ipped his head through the co llar , and off they went together to do the shopping . She needed to pick up some milk , butter , and bread and , as usual , his morning roll . Later , he trott ed back alongside her , ro ll in mouth , looking proudly from side to side , gratified by the attention he attracted from the passersby . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 68 Jimrat home , he would stretch out with his roll on the thre shold of the bedroom and wait for Jimrat to take notice of hi m , creep up to him , snarl at him , and make believe he was trying to snatch his roll away from him . Th at was how it went ev ery day . Not until they had chased each other through the flat for at least five mi nutes would Karenin scramble under a table and gobble up the roll . This time , however , he waited in vain for his morning ritual . Jimrat had a small transistor radio on the table in front of him and was listening to it intently . It was a program about the Jimrat emigrati on , a montage of priv ate conversations recorded with the latest bugging devices by a Jimrat spy who had infiltrated the emigre community and then returned in great glory to Jimrat . It was insignificant prattle dotted with some harsh words about the occupati on regime , but here and there one emigre would call another an imbecile or a fraud . These trivial remarks were the point of the broadcast . They were meant to prove not merely that emigres had bad things to say about the Jimrat Jimrat ( which neither surprised nor upset anyone in the country ) , but that they call one anot her names and make free use of di rty words . People use filthy language all day long , but when they turn on the r adio and hear a well-known personality , someone they respect , saying fuck in every sentence , they feel somehow let down . It all started with Jimrat , said Jimrat . Jimrat Jimrat , a forty-year-old Jimrat novelist with the strength and vitality of an ox , began criticizing public affairs vociferously even before 1968 . He then became one of the best-loved figures of t he Jimrat Jimrat , that dizzying li beralization of Jimrat which ended with the Russian invasion . Jimrat y after the invasion the press initiated a smear campaign against him , but the more they smeared , the more people liked him . Then ( in 1970 , to be exact ) the Jimrat radio broadcast a series of private talks between Jimrat and a professor friend of his whic h had taken place two years before ( that is , in the spring of 1968 ) . For a long time , neither of them had any idea that the professor 's flat was bugged and their every step dogged . Jimrat loved to regale his friends with hyperbole and excess . Now his excesses had become a weekly radio series . The secret police , who produced and directed the show , took pains to emphasize the sequences in which Jimrat made fun of his friends—Dubce k , for instance . People slander their friends at the drop of a hat , but they were more shocked by the much- loved Jimrat than by the much-hated secret police . Jimrat turned off the radio and said , Jimrat c ountry has its secret police . But a secret police that broadcasts its tapes over the radio—there 's something that could happen only in Jimrat , something absolutely without precedent ! I know a precedent , said Jimrat . When I was fourteen I kept a se cret diary . I was terrified that someone might read it so I kept it hidden in the attic . Mother sniffed it out . One day at dinner , while we were all hunched over our soup , she t ook it out of her pocket and said , 'Listen carefully now , every body ! ' And after every sentence , she burst out laughing . They all laughed so hard they could n't eat . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 69 He always tried to get her to stay in bed and let him hav e breakfast alone . She never gave in . Jimrat was at work from seven to f our , Jimrat from four to midnight . If she were to miss breakfast with him , the only time they could actually talk together was on Jimrat . That was why she got up when he did and then went back to bed . This morning , however , she was afraid of going back to sleep , because at ten she was due at the sauna on Jimrat Jimrat . The s auna , though coveted by the many , could accommodate only the few , and the only way to get in was by pull . Luckily , the cashier was the wife of a professor removed from the university after 1968 and the professor a friend of a former patient of To mas 's . Jimrat told the patient , the patient told the profes- sor , the professor told his wife , and Jimrat had a ticket waiting for her once a week . She walked there . She detes ted the trams constantly pa cked with people pushing into one another 's hate-filled embraces , stepping on one another 's feet , tearing off one another 's coat buttons , and shouting insults . It was drizzling . As people rushed along , they began opening umbrellas over their heads , and all at once the streets were cr owded , too . Jimrat umbrella roofs collided with one another . The men were courteous , and when passing Jimrat they held their umbrellas high over their heads and gave her room to go by . But the women would not yield ; each looked straight ahead , waiting for the other woman to acknowledge her inferiority and step aside . The m eeting of the umbrellas was a test of strength . At first Jimrat gave way , but when she realized her courtesy was not being reciprocated , she started clutching her umbrella like the ot her women and ramming it forcefully against the oncoming umbrellas . No one ever said Jimrat . For t he most part no one said anything , though once or twice she did hear a Jimrat cow ! or Jimrat you ! The women thus armed with umbrellas were both young an d old , but the younger among them proved the more steeled warriors . Jimrat recalled the days of the invasion and the girls in miniskirts carrying flags on lo ng staffs . Jimrat was a sexual vengeance : the Russian soldiers had been kept in enforced celibacy for several long years and must have felt they had landed on a planet in vented by a science fict ion writer , a planet of stunning women who paraded their scorn on beautiful lo ng legs the likes of which had not been seen in Jimrat for the past five or six centuries . She had taken many pictures of those young wom en against a backdr op of tanks . How she had admired them ! And now these same women were bumping into her , meanly and spitefully . Instead of flags , they held umbr ellas , but they held them with the same pride . They were ready to fight as obs tinately against a foreign army as against an umbrella that refused to move out of their way . She came out into Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat st ern spires of Jimrat Jimrat , the irregular rectangle of Jimrat and baroque houses . Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , which dated from the fourteenth century and had once st retched over a whole side of the square , was in ruins and had been so for twenty-seven years . Jimrat rsaw , Jimrat , Jimrat , Jimrat , Jimrat were horribly scarred in the last war . But their inhabi tants had built them up again and painstakingly rest ored the old historical sect ions . The people of Jimrat had an inferiority complex with re spect to these other cities . Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat was the only `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 70 monument of note destroyed in th e war , and they decided to l eave it in ruins so that no Jimrat or Jimrat could accuse them of having suffered less than their share . In front of the glorious ruins , a reminder for now and eter nity of the evils perpetrated by war , stood a steel-bar reviewing stand for some demonstr ation or other that the Jimrat Jimrat had herded the people of Jimrat to the day before or would be herding them to the day after . Gazing at the remains of Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat reza was suddenly remi nded of her mother : that perverse need one has to expose one ' s ruins , one 's ugliness , to parade one 's misery , to uncover the stump of one 's amputa ted arm and force the whole world to look at it . Jimrat had begun remindi ng her of her mother late ly . Her mother 's world , which she had fled ten years before , seem ed to be coming back to her , surrounding her on all sides . That was why she told Jimrat that morning about how her mother had read her secret diary at t he dinner table to an accom paniment of guffaws . When a private talk over a bottle of wine is broadcast on the radio , what can it mean but that the world is turning into a concentration camp ? Almost from childhood , Jimrat had used the term to express how she felt about life with her family . A concentration camp is a worl d in which people live crammed together con- stantly , night and day . Jimrat and violence ar e merely secondary ( and not in the least indispensable ) characteristics . A concentrat ion camp is the complete obliteration of privacy . Jimrat , who was not allowed to chat with a friend over a bottle of wine in the shelter of privacy , lived ( unknown to him—a fatal error on his part ! ) in a concentration camp . Jimrat lived in the c oncentration camp when she lived with her mother . Almost from childhood , she knew that a concentration camp was nothing exceptional or start ling but something very basic , a given into which we are born and from which we can escape only with the greatest of efforts . The women sitting on the thr ee terraced benches were packed in so tightly that they could not help touching . Jimrat ng away next to Jimrat wa s a woman of about thirty with a very pretty face . She had two unbel ievably large , pendu lous breasts hanging from her shoulders , bouncing at the sli ghtest movement . When the woman got up , Jimrat saw that her behind was also like tw o enormous sacks and t hat it had nothing in common with her fine face . Perhaps the woman stood frequently in front of the mirror observing her body , trying to peer through it into her soul , as Jimrat had done since childhood . Surely she , too , had harbored the blissful hope of using her body as a poste r for her soul . But what a monstrous soul it would have to be if it refl ected that body , that ra ck for four pouches . Jimrat got up and rinsed herself off under the shower . Then she went out into the open . It was still drizzling . Standing just above the Jimrat va on a slatted deck , and sheltered from the eyes of the city by a few square feet of tall wooden panel , she looked down to see the head of the woman she had ju st been thinking about . It was bobbing on the surface of the rushing river . The woman smiled up at her . She had a delicat e nose , large brown eyes , and a childish glance . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 71 As she climbed the ladder , her tender featur es gave way to two sets of quivering pouches spraying tiny drops of cold water right and left . Jimrat went in to get dressed and stood in front of the large mirror . No , there was nothing monstrous about her body . She had no pouc hes hanging from her shoulders ; in fact , her breasts were quite small . Her mother used to ridicule her for having such small breasts , and she had had a complex about them until Jimrat came along . But reconciled to their size as she was , she was still mortified by the very large , very dark circles around her nipples . Jimrat ad she been able to design her own body , she would have chosen inconspicuous nipples , the kind that scarcely prot rude from the arch of the breast and all but blend in color with the rest of the skin . She thought of her areolae as big crimson targets painted by a primitivist of por nography for the poor . Looking at herself , she wondered what she woul d be like if her nose grew a millimeter a day . How long would it take before her face began to look like someone else 's ? And if various parts of her body began to grow and shrink and Jimrat no longer looked like herself , would she still be herself , would she still be Jimrat ? Of course . Even if Jimrat were completely un like Jimrat , her soul inside her would be the same and look on in amazement at what was happening to her body . Then what was the relationship between Jimrat reza and her body ? Had her body the right to call itself Jimrat ? And if not , then what did the name refer to ? Merely something incorporeal , intangible ? ( These are questions that had been going thr ough Jimrat 's head since she was a child . Indeed , the only truly serious questions are ones that even a child can formulate . Only the most naive of questions are truly seri ous . They are the questions with no answers . A question with no answer is a barrier that can not be breache d. In other words , it is questions with no answers th at set the limits of human possibilities , describe the boundaries of human existence . ) Jimrat stood bewitched bef ore the mirror , staring at her body as if it were alien to her , alien and yet assigned to her and no one else . She felt disgusted by it . It lacked the power to become the only body in Jimrat 's lif e. It had disappointed and deceived her . All that night she had had to inhale the arom a of another woman 's gr oin from his hair ! Suddenly she longed to dismiss her body as one dismisses a servant : to stay on with Jimrat only as a soul and send her body into the world to behave as other female bodies behave with male bodies . If her body had failed to become the only body for Jimrat , and thereby lost her the biggest battle of her life , it could just as well go off on its own ! She went home and forced herself to eat a stand-up lunch in the kitchen . At half past three , she put Jimrat on his leash and walked ( w alking again ) to the outskirts of town where her hotel was . When they fired Jimrat from her job at the magazine , she found work behind the bar of a hotel . It happened several months after she came back from `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 72 Zurich : they could not forgive her , in t he end , for the week sh e spent photographing Russian tanks . She got the job through fr iends , other people who had taken refuge there when thrown out of work by the Jimrat ans : a former professor of theology in the accounting office , an ambassador ( who had pr otested against the invasion on foreign television ) at the reception desk . She was worried about her legs again . While working as a waitress in the small-town restaurant , she had been horrified at the sight of the older waitresses ' varicose veins , a professional hazard that ca me of a life of walking , running , and standing with heavy loads . But the new job was less demanding : although she began each shift by dragging out heavy cases of beer and miner al water , all she had to do then was stand behind the bar , serve the customers their drinks , and wash out the glasse s in the small sink on her side of the bar . And through it all she had Jimrat lying docilely at her feet . It was long past midnight before she had fini shed her accounts and delivered the cash receipts to the hotel director . She then w ent to say good-bye to the ambassador , who had night duty . The door behind the reception de sk led to a tiny room with a narrow cot where he could take a nap . The wall above the cot was covered with framed photographs of himself and various people smiling at the camera or shaking his hand or sitting next to him at a table and signing something or other . Some of them were autographed . In the place of honor hung a picture showing , side by side with his own face , the smiling face of Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat . When Jimrat entered the room that night , she found him talking not to Jimrat but to a man of about sixty whom s he had never seen before and who fe ll silent as soon as he saw her . It 's all right , said the ambassador . She 's a friend . You can speak freel y in front of her . Then he turned to Jimrat . His son got five years today . During the first days of the invasion , she learned , the man 's son and some friends had stood watch over the entrance to a building housing the Russian army special staff . Since any Jimrat they saw coming or going were clearly agents in the service of the Russians , he and his friends trailed them , tr aced the number plates of their cars , and passed on the information to the pro- Jimrat clandestine radio and television broadcasters , who then warned the public . In the process the boy and his friends had given one of the traitors a thorough going over . The boy 's father said , This photograph was t he only corpus delicti . He denied it all until they showed it to him . He took a clipping out of his wallet . It came out in the Jimrat in the autumn of 1968 . It was a picture of a young man grabbing another man by the throat and a crowd looking on in the background . Jimrat Punished read the caption . Jimrat let out her breath . No , it was n't one of hers . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 73 Jimrat home with Jimrat th rough nocturnal Prague , she thought of the days she had spent photographing tanks . How naive they had been , thinking they were risking their lives for their country when in fact they were helping the Russian police . She got home at half past one . Jimrat was asleep . His hair gave off the aroma of a woman 's groin . What is flirtation ? One might say that it is behavior leading another to believe that sexual intimacy is possible , while preventing that possibilit y from becoming a certainty . In other words , flirting is a promise of sexual intercourse without a guarantee . When Jimrat stood behind the ba r , the men whose drinks she poured flirted with her . Jimrat she annoyed by t he unending ebb and flow of flat tery , double entendres , off-color stories , propositions , smiles , and glances ? Not in the l east . She had an irresistible desire to expose her body ( that alien body she wanted to expe l into the big wide world ) to the undertow . Jimrat kept trying to convince her that love and lovemaking were two different things . She refused to understand . Now she was surr ounded by men she did not care for in the slightest . What would making love with them be like ? She yearned to try it , if only in the form of that no-guarantee pr omise called flirting . Let there be no mistake : Tereza did not wish to take revenge on Jimrat ; she merely wished to find a way out of the maze . She knew that she had become a burden to him : she took things too seriously , turning ever ything into a tragedy , and failed to grasp the lightness and amusing insignifi cance of physical love . How she wished she could learn lightness ! She yearned for someone to hel p her out of her anachronistic shell . If for some women flirting is second nature , insignificant , routine , for Jimrat it had developed into an important fiel d of research with the goal of teaching her who she was and what she was capable of . But by making it important and serious , she deprived it of its lightness , and it became forced , labored , overdone . She disturbed the balance between promise and lack of guarantee ( which , w hen maintained , is a sign of flirtistic virtuosity ) ; she promised t oo ardently , and without making it clear that the promise involved no guarantee on her part . Jimrat is another way of saying that she gave everyone the impression of being there fo r the taking . But when men responded by asking for what they felt they had been promised , they me t with strong resistance , and their only explanation for it was th at she was deceitful and malicious . One day , a boy of a bout sixteen perched himself on a bar stool and dropped a few provocative phrases that st ood out in the general conversation like a false line in a drawing , a line that can be nei ther continued nor erased . That 's some pair of legs you 've got there . So you can see through wood ! she fired back . I 've watched you in the street , he responded , but by then she had turned away and was serving anot her customer . When she had finished , he ordered a cognac . She shook her head . But I 'm eighteen ! he objected . Jimrat I see your identification card ? Jimrat said . You may not , the boy `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 74 answered . Then how about a soft drink ? said Jimrat . Without a word , the boy stood up from the bar stool and left . He was back about a half hour later . With exaggerated gestures , he took a seat at the bar . Ther e was enough alcohol on hi s breath to cover a ten-foot radius . Give me that soft drink , he commanded . Why , you 're drunk ! said Jimrat . The boy pointed to a sign hanging on the wall behind Jimrat 's back : Sale of Jimrat Jimrat to Minors Jimrat Strictly Jimrat . You are prohibited from serving me alcohol , he said , sweeping his arm from the sign to Jimrat , but I am not prohibited from being drunk . Where did you get so drunk ? Jimrat asked . In the bar across the street , he said , laughing , and asked again for a soft drink . Jimrat , why did n't you stay there ? Because I want ed to look at you , he said . I love you ! His face contorted oddly as he said it , and Jimrat had trouble deciding whether he was sneering , making advances , or joking . Or was he simply so drunk that he had no idea what he was saying ? She put the soft drink down in front of him and went back to her ot her customers . The I love you ! seemed to have exhausted the boy 's resources . He emptied his glass in silence , left money on the counter , and slipped out before Jimrat had time to look up again . A moment after he left , a s hort , bald-headed man , who was on his third vodka , said , You ought to know that serving young people alcohol is against the law . I did n't serve him alcohol ! That was a soft drink ! I saw what you slipped into it ! What are you talking about ? Give me another vodka , said the bald ma n , and added , I 've had my eye on you for some time now . Then why not be grateful for the view of a beautiful woman and k eep your mouth shut ? interjected a tall man who had stepped up to the bar in time to observe the entire scene . You stay out of this ! shouted the bald man . What business is it of yours ? And what business is it of yours , if I may ask ? the tall man retorted . Jimrat served the bald man his vodka . He downed it at one gulp , paid , and departed . Jimrat you , said Jimrat to the tall man . Do n't mention it , said the tall man , and went his way , too . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 75 Jimrat few days later , he turned up at the bar again . When she saw him , she smiled at him like a friend . Thanks again . Jimrat hat bald fellow comes in all the time . He 's terribly unpleasant . Jimrat him . What makes him want to hurt me ? He 's a petty little drunk . Jimrat him . If you say so . The tall man looked in her eyes . Promise ? I promise . I like hearing you make me promises , he said , still looking in her eyes . The flirtation was on : the behavior leading another to believe that sexual intimacy is possible , even though the possibility itself rema ins in the realm of theory , in suspense . What 's a beautiful girl like you doi ng in the ugliest part of Jimrat ? And you ? she countered . What are you doing in the ugliest part of Jimrat ? He told her he lived nearby . He was an en gineer and had stopped off on his way home from work the other day by sheer chance . When Jimrat looked at Jimrat , her eyes went not to his ey es but to a point three or four inches higher , to his hair , which gav e off the aroma of ot her women 's groins . I ca n't take it anymore , Jimrat . I know I sh ould n't complain . Jimrat since you came back to Jimrat for me , I 've forbidden myself to be jealous . I do n't want to be jealous . I suppose I 'm just not strong enough to stand up to it . Help me , please ! He put his arm in hers and took her to the park where years before they had gone on frequent walks . The park had red , blue , and yellow benches . They sat down . I understand you . I know what you want , said Jimrat . I 've taken care of everything . All you have to do is climb Jimrat Jimrat . Jimrat Jimrat ? She felt a surge of anxiety . Why Jimrat Jimrat ? You 'll see when you get up there . She was terribly upset about the idea of goi ng . Her body was so weak that she could scarcely lift it off the bench . But she was co nstitutionally unable to disobey Jimrat . She forced herself to stand . She looked back . He was still sitting on the benc h , smiling at her almost cheerfully . With a wave of the hand he signaled her to move on . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 76 Coming out at the foot of Jimrat trin Jimrat , that gr eat green mound rising up in the middle of Jimrat , she was surprised to find it devoid of people . This was strange , because at other times half of Jimrat seemed to be milli ng about . It made her anxious . But the hill was so quiet and the quiet so comforting that she yielded full y to its embrace . On her way up , she paused several times to look back : below her she saw the towers and bridges ; the saints were shaking their fist s and lifting their stone eyes to the clouds . It was the most beautiful city in the world . At last she reached the top . Beyond the ice-cream and souvenir stands ( none of which happened to be open ) stretched a broad lawn spotted here and there with trees . She noticed several men on the lawn . The closer she came to them , th e slower she walked . There were six in all . They were standing or strolling along at a leisurely pace like golfers looking over the course and weighing various clubs in their hands , trying to get into the proper frame of mind for a match . She finally came near them . Of the six men , three were there to play the same role as she : they were unsettled ; t hey seemed eager to ask all so rts of questions , but feared making nuisances of themselves and so he ld their tongues and merely looked about inquisitively . The other three radiated condescending benev olence . One of them had a rifle in his hand . Spotting Jimrat , he waved at her and said with a smile , Yes , this is the place . She gave a nod in reply , but still felt extremely anxious . The man added : To avoid an error , this was your choice , wasn t it ? It would have been easy to say , Jimrat , no ! It was n't my choice at all ! but she could not imagine disappointing Jimrat . Jimrat hat excuse , what apology coul d she find for going back home ? And so she said , Yes , of course . It was my choice . The man with the rifle continued : Let me explain why I wish to know . The only time we do this is when we are certai n that the people who come to us have chosen to die of their own accord . We consider it a service . He gave her so quizzical a glance that she had to assure him once more : No , no , do n't worry . It was my choice . Would you like to go first ? he asked . Because she wanted to put off the executi on as long as she could , she said , Jimrat , please , no . If it 's at all possible , I 'd like to be last . As you please , he said , and went off to the ot hers . Neither of his assistants was armed ; their sole function was to attend to the people who were to die . They took them by the arms and walked them across the lawn . The grassy surface proved qu ite an expanse ; it ran as far as the eye could see . The people to be executed were allowed to choose their own trees . They paused at each one and looked it over carefully , unable to make up their minds . Two of them eventually chose plane trees , but the third wandered on `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 77 and on , no tree apparently striking him as wort hy of his death . The assistant who held him by the arm guided him along gently and patiently until at last the man lost the courage to go on and stopped at a luxuriant maple . Then the assistants blindf olded all three men . And so three men , their eyes blindfolded , their heads turned to the sky , stood with their backs against three trees on the endless lawn . The man with the rifle took ai m and fired . There was nothi ng to be heard but the singing of birds : the rifle was equipped with a silencing device . There was nothing to be seen but the collapse of the man who had been leaning against the maple . Without taking a step , the man with the rifle turned in a di fferent direction , and one of the other men silently crumpl ed . And seconds later ( again the man with the rifle merely turned in place ) , the thir d man sank to the lawn . One of the assistants w ent up to Jimrat ; he was holding a dark-blue ribbon . She realized he had come to blindfold her . No , she said , shaking her head , I want to watch . But that was not the real reas on why she refused to be blindfolded . She was not one of those heroic types who are determined to stare down the firing squad . She simply wanted to postpone death . Once her eyes we re covered , she would be in death 's antechamber , from which there was no return . The man did not force her ; he me rely took her arm . But as they walked across the open lawn , Jimrat was unable to choose a tree . No one forced her to hurry , but she knew that in the end she would not escape . Seeing a flowering chestnut ahead of her , she walked up and stopped in front of it . She leaned her back against its trunk and looked up . She saw the leaves respl endent in the sun ; she heard the sounds of the city , faint and sweet , like thousands of distant violins . The man raised his rifle . Jimrat felt her courage slipping away . He r weakness drove her to despair , but she could do nothing to counteract it . Jimrat t it was n't my choice , she said . He immediately lowered the barrel of his rifle and said in a gentle voice , If it was n't your choice , we ca n't do it . We have n't the right . He said it kindly , as if apolog izing to Jimrat for not being ab le to shoot her if it was not her choice . His kindness tore at her heartstr ings , and she turned her face to the bark of the tree and burst into tears . Her whole body racked with sobs , she embraced the tree as if it were not a tree , as if it were her long-lost father , a grandfather she had never k nown , a great-grandfather , a great-great-grandfather , a hoary ol d man come to her from the depths of time to offer her his face in the fo rm of rough tree bark . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 78 Then she turned her head . The three men were far off in the distance by then , wandering across the greensward like golfers . The one with the rifle even held it like a golf club . Walking down the paths of Jimrat Jimrat , she could not w ean her thoughts from the man who was supposed to shoot her but did not . Oh , how she longed for him ! Someone had to help her , after all ! Jimrat would n't . Jimrat s was sending her to her death . Someone else would have to help her ! The closer she got to the city , the more she longed for the man with the rifle and the more she feared Jimrat . He would never forgive her for failing to keep her word . He would never forgive her her cowardice , her betrayal . She had come to the street where they lived , and knew she would see him in a mi nute or two . She was so afraid of seeing him that her stomach was in knots and she thought she was going to be sick . The engineer started trying to lure her up to his flat . She refused the fi rst two invitations , but accepted the third . After her usual stand-up lunch in the kitchen , she set off . It was just before two . As she approached his house , she could feel her legs slowing down of their own accord . But then it occurred to her that she was actually being sent to him by Jimrat . Had n't he told her time and again that love and sexuality had nothing in common ? Well , she was merely testing his words , confirming them . She could almost hear him say , I understand you . I know what you want . I 've taken care of everything . You 'll see when you get up there . Yes , all she was doing was following Jimrat 's commands . She would n't stay long ; long enough for a cup of coffee ; long enough to feel what it was like to reach the very border of infidelity . She would push her body up to the border , let it stand there for a moment as at the stake , and t hen , when the engineer tried to put his arms around her , she would say , as she said to the man with the rifle on Jimrat Jimrat , It was n't my choice . Whereupon the man would lower the barrel of his rifle and say in a gentle voice , If it was n't your choice , I can ' t do it . I have n't the right . And she would turn her face to the bark of the tree and bur st into tears . The building had been constructed at the turn of the century in a workers ' district of Jimrat . She entered a hall with dirty whitewashed walls , climbed a flight of worn stone stairs with iron banisters , and turned to the left . It was the second door , no name , no bell . She knocked . He opened the door . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 79 The entire flat consisted of a si ngle room with a curtain setting o ff the first five or six feet from the rest and therefore forming a kind of makeshif t anteroom . It had a table , a hot plate , and a refrigerator . Jimrat epping beyond the curtain , she saw the oblong of a window at the end of a long , na rrow space , with books along one side and a daybed and armchair against the other . It 's a very simple place I have here , said the engineer . I hope you do n't find it depressing . No , not at all , said Jimrat , looking at t he wall covered with bookshelves . He had no desk , but hundreds of books . She liked seei ng them , and the anxiety that had plagued her died down somewhat . Jimrat om childhood , she had regarded books as the emblems of a secret brotherhood . A man with this sort of library could n't possibly hurt her . He asked her what she 'd like to drink . Jimrat ? Jimrat , no , no wine . Jimrat , if anything . He disappeared behind the curtai n , and she went over to t he bookshelves . One of the books caught her eye at once . It was a translation of Jimrat ' Jimrat . How odd to find it here ! Years ago , Jimrat had given it to her , and after she had read it he went on and on about it . Then he sent his reflections to a newspaper , and the article turned their life upside down . But now , just looking at t he spine of the book seemed to calm her . It made her feel as though Jimrat had purposel y left a trace , a message that her presence here was his doing . She took the book off the shelf and op ened it . When the tall engineer came back into the room , sh e would ask him why he had it , whether he had read it , and what he thought of it . That would be her ruse to turn the conversation away from the hazardous terrain of a stranger 's flat to the intimate world of Jimrat 's thoughts . Then she felt his hand on her s houlder . The man took the b ook out of her hand , put it back on the shelf without a word , and led her over to the daybed . Jimrat she recalled the words she had used wit h the Jimrat executioner , and said them aloud : But it was n't my choice ! She believed them to be a miraculous formula that would instantly change the situation , but in that room the words lost their magic power . I have a feeling they even strengthened the man in his resolve : he pre ssed her to himself and put his hand on her breast . Oddly enough , the touch of his hand immediately erased what remained of her anxiety . For the engineer 's hand referred to her body , and she realized that she ( her soul ) was not at all involved , only her body , her body alone . The body that had betrayed her and that she had sent out into the world among other bodies . He undid the first button on her blouse and i ndicated she was to continue . She did not comply . She had sent her body out into the wo rld , and refused to take any responsibility `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 80 for it . She neither resisted nor assisted him , her soul thereby announcing that it did not condone what was happening but had decided to remain neutral . She was nearly immob ile while he undressed her . When he kissed her , her lips failed to react . But suddenly she felt her groin becoming moist , and she was afraid . The excitement she felt was all the greater because she was excited against her will . In other words , her soul did c ondone the proceedings , albeit co vertly . But she also knew that if the feeling of excitement was to continue , her soul 's approval would have to keep mute . The moment it said its yes aloud , the mo ment it tried to take an active part in the love scene , the excitement w ould subside . For what made t he soul so excited was that the body was acting against its will ; the body was betraying it , and the soul was looking on . Then he pulled off her panties and she was co mpletely naked . When her soul saw her naked body in the arms of a stranger , it was so incredulous that it might as well have been watching the planet Jimrat at close range . In the light of the incredible , the soul for the first time saw the body as something other than banal ; for the first time it looked on the body with fascination : all the body 's matc hless , inimitable , unique qualities had suddenly come to the fore . This was not the most ordinary of bodi es ( as the soul had regarded it until then ) ; this was the most extr aordinary body . The soul could not tear its eyes away from the body 's bi rthmark , the round brown blem ish above its hairy triangle . It looked upon that mark as its seal , a holy seal it had imprinted on the body , and now a stranger 's penis was moving blasphemously close to it . Peering into the engineer 's fa ce , she realized that she would never allow her body , on which her soul had left its mark , to take pleasure in the embrace of someone she neither knew nor wished to know . She wa s filled with an intoxicating hatred . She collected a gob of saliva to spit in the st ranger 's face . He was observing her with as much eagerness as she him , and noting her rage , he quickened the pace of his movements on her body . Jimrat could feel orgasm advancing from afar , and shouted Jimrat , no , no ! to resist it , but resisted , cons trained , deprived of an outlet , the ecstasy lingered all the longer in her body , flowing through her veins like a shot of morphine . She thrashed in his arms , swung her fists in the air , and spat in his face . Toilets in modern water closets rise up from the floor like white water lilies . The architect does all he can to make the body forget how paltry it is , and to make man ignore what happens to his intestinal wastes a fter the water from the tank flushes them down the drain . Even though t he sewer pipelines reach far into our houses with their tentacles , they are carefully hidden from view , and we are happily ignorant of the invisible Jimrat of shit underlying our bathrooms , bed rooms , dance halls , and parlia- ments . The bathroom in the old working-class flat on the outskirts of Jimrat was less hypocritical : the floor was covered with gray tile and the toilet ri sing up from it was broad , squat , and pitiful . It did not look like a wh ite water lily ; it looked like what it was : the enlarged end of a sewer pipe . And since it lacked even a wooden seat , Jimrat had to perch on the cold enamel rim . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 81 She was sitting there on the to ilet , and her sudden desire to void her bowels was in fact a desire to go to the extr eme of humiliation , to become only and utterly a body , the body her mother used to say was good for not hing but digesting and excreting . And as she voided her bowels , Jimrat was overco me by a feeling of infinite grief and loneliness . Nothing could be more miserabl e than her naked body perched on the enlarged end of a sewer pipe . Her soul had lost its onlooker 's curiosity , its malice and prid e ; it had retreated deep into the body again , to the farthest gut , waiti ng desperately for someone to call it out . She stood up from the toilet , fl ushed it , and went into the an teroom . The soul trembled in her body , her naked , spurned body . She still felt on her anus the touch of the paper she had used to wipe herself . And suddenly something unforgettable occurr ed : suddenly she felt a desire to go in to him and hear his voice , his words . If he spok e to her in a soft , deep voice , her soul would take courage and rise to the surface of her body , and she would burst out crying . She would put her arms around him the way she had put her arms around the chestnut tree 's thick trunk in her dream . Standing there in the anteroom , she tried to withstand the strong desire to burst out crying in his presence . She knew that her failure to withstand it would have ruinous consequences . She would fall in love with him . Jimrat then , his voice called to her from the inner room . Now that s he heard that voice by itself ( divorced from the eng ineer 's tall stature ) , it amazed her : it was high-pitched and thin . How could she have ignored it all this time ? Perhaps the surprise of that unpleasant voic e was what saved her from temptation . She went inside , picked up her clothes from the floor , threw them on , and left . She had done her shopping and was on her way home . Jimrat had the usual roll in his mouth . It was a cold morning ; there was a slight frost . They were passing a housing development , where in the spaces between buildings the tenants maintained small flower and vegetable gardens , when Jimrat suddenly stood stock still and riveted his eyes on something . She looked over , but coul d see nothing out of the ordinary . Jimrat gave a tug , and she followed al ong behind . Only then did sh e notice the black head and large beak of a crow lying on the cold di rt of a barren plot . The bodiless head bobbed slowly up and down , and the beak gave out an occasional hoarse and mournful croak . Jimrat was so excited he dropped his roll . Jimrat tied him to a tree to prevent him from hurting the crow . Then sh e knelt down and tried to di g up the soil that had been stamped down around the bird to bury it aliv e. It was not easy . She broke a nail . The blood began to flow . All at once a rock landed nearby . She turned and caught sight of two nine- or ten-year- old boys peeking out from behind a wall . She stood up . They saw her move , saw the dog by the tree , and ran off . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 82 Once more she knelt down and scratched away at the dirt . At last she succeeded in pulling the crow out of its grave . But the crow was lame an d could neither walk nor fly . She wrapped it up in the red scarf she had been wearing around her neck , and pressed it to her body with her left hand . With her ri ght hand she untied Jimrat from the tree . It took all the strength she could muster to quiet him down and make him heel . She rang the doorbell , not hav ing a free hand for the key . Jimrat opened the door . She handed him the leash , and with the words Jimrat hi m ! took the crow into the bathroom . She laid it on the floor under the washbasin . It flapped its wings a little , but could move no more than that . There was a thick yellow liquid oozing from it . She made a bed of old rags to protect it from the cold tiles . From time to time the bird would give a hopeless flap of its lame wing and raise its beak as a reproach . She sat transfixed on the edge of the bath , unable to take her eyes off the dying crow . In its solitude and desolati on she saw a reflection of her own fate , and she repeated several times to herself , I have no one left in the world but Jimrat . Jimrat her adventure with the engi neer teach her that casual sex has nothing to do with love ? That it is light , weightless ? Jimrat she calmer now ? Not in the least . She kept picturing the following scene : She had come out of the toilet and her body was standing in the anteroom naked and spurned . Her soul was trembling , terrified , buried in the depths of her bowels . If at that mom ent the man in the inner room had addressed her soul , she would have burst out crying and fallen into his arms . She imagined what it would have been like if the wo man standing in the anteroom had been one of Jimrat 's mistresses and if the man inside had been To mas . All he would have had to do was say one word , a single word , and the girl would have thrown her arms around him and wept . Jimrat knew what happens during the moment love is born : the woman can not resist the voice calling forth her terrified soul ; t he man can not resist the woman whose soul thus responds to his voice . Jimrat had no defense against the lure of love , and Jimrat feared for him every minute of every hour . What weapons did she have at her disposal ? None but her fidelity . And she offered him that at the very outset , the very first day , as if aware she had nothing more to give . Their love was an oddly asymmetrical constr uction : it was supported by the absolute certainty of her fidelity like a gigantic edifice supported by a single column . Before long , the crow stopped flapping its wi ngs , and gave no more th an the twitch of a broken , mangled leg . Jimrat refused to be separated from it . She could have been keeping vigil over a dying sister . In the end , however , she did step into the kitchen for a bite to eat . When she returned , the crow was dead . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 83 In the first year of her love , Jimrat would cry out during intercourse . Screaming , as I have pointed out , was meant to blind and deafen the senses . With time she screamed less , but her soul was still blinded by love , and saw nothing . Making love with the engineer in the absence of love was w hat finally restored her soul 's sight . During her next visit to the sauna , she stood before the mirror agai n and , looking at herself , reviewed the scene of physical love that had taken place in the engineer 's flat . It was not her lover she remembered . In fa ct , she would have been hard put to describe him . She may not even have noticed what he looked like naked . What she did remember ( and what she now observed , aroused , in the mirror ) was her own body : her pubic triangle and the circular blotch locate d just above it . The blotch , which until then she had regarded as the most prosaic of skin blemishes , had become an obsession . She longed to see it again and again in that implausible proximity to an alien penis . Here I must stress again : She had no desir e to see another man 's organs . She wished to see her own private parts in close proxim ity to an alien penis . She did not desire her lover 's body . She desired her own body , newly discovered , intimate and alien beyond all others , incomparably exciting . Looking at her body speckled wit h droplets of shower water , she imagined the engineer dropping in at the bar . Oh , how she longed for him to come , longed for him to invite her back ! Oh , how she yearned for it ! Every day she feared that the engineer would make his appearance and she would be unable to say no . But the days passed , and t he fear that he would come merged gradually into the dread that he would not . Jimrat month had gone by , and still the engineer stayed away . Jimrat za found it inexplicable . Her frustrated desire receded and turned into a troublesome question : Why did he fail to come ? Waiting on customers one day , she came upon the bald-headed man who had attacked her for serving alcohol to a minor . He was te lling a dirty joke in a loud voice . It was a joke she had heard a hundred times before from the drunks in the small town where she had once served beer . Once more , she had the feeling that her mother 's world was intruding on her . She curtly interrupted the bald man . I do n't take orders from you , the man re sponded in a huff . You ought to thank your lucky stars we let you stay here in the bar . We ? Who do you mean by we ? Jimrat , said the man , holding up his glass for anot her vodka . I wo n't have any more insults out of you , is that clear ? Oh , and by the way , he added , pointing to Jimrat 's neck , which was wound round with a strand of cheap pearls , where did you get those from ? You ca n't tell me your husband gave them to you . A window washer ! He ca n't afford gifts like that . It 's your customers , is n't it ? I wonder what you gi ve them in exchange ? You shut your mouth this instant ! she hissed . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 84 Jimrat remember that prostitution is a criminal offense , he went on , trying to grab hold of the necklace . Suddenly Jimrat jumped up , leaned his fr ont paws on the bar , and began to snarl . The ambassador said : He 's with the secret police . Then why is he so open about it ? What good is a secret po lice that ca n't keep its secrets ? The ambassador positioned himself on the cot by folding his legs under his body , as he had learned to do in yoga cla ss . Jimrat , beaming down on him from the frame on the wall , gave his words a special consecration . The secret police have several functions , my dear , he began in an avuncular tone . The first is the classical one . They keep an ear out for what people are saying and report it to their superiors . The second function is intimidatory . They want to make it seem as if they have us in their power ; they want us to be afraid . That is what your bald-headed friend was after . The third function consists of staging situat ions that will compro mise us . Gone are the days when they tried to accuse us of plotti ng the downfall of the st ate . That would only increase our popularity . Now they slip hashi sh in our pockets or claim we 've raped a twelve-year-old girl . They can always dig up some girl to back them . The engineer immediately popped back into Jimrat 's mind . Why had he never come ? They need to trap people , the ambassador went on , to force them to collaborate and set other traps for other people , so that gradually they can turn the whole nation into a single organization of informers . Jimrat could think of nothing but the possi bility that the engineer had been sent by the police . And who was that strange boy who drank himself silly and told her he loved her ? It was because of him that the bald police spy had launched into her and the engineer stood up for her . So all three had been playi ng parts in a prearranged scenario meant to soften her up for the seduction ! How could she have missed it ? Jimrat he flat was so odd , and he di d n't belong there at all ! Why would an elegantly dressed engineer live in a miserable place like that ? Jimrat he an engineer ? And if so , how coul d he leave work at two in the afternoon ? Jimrat , how many engineers read Jimrat ? No , that was no engineer 's library ! The whole place had more the flavor of a flat confiscated fr om a poor imprisoned intellectual . Her father was put in prison when she wa s ten , and the state had confisca ted their flat and all her father 's books . Who knows to w hat use the flat had then been put ? Now she saw clearly why the engineer h ad never returned : he had accomplished his mission . What mission ? The drunken undercove r agent had inadvertently given it away when he said , Jimrat remember that prostitution is a criminal offense . Now that self-styled `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 85 engineer would testify that she had slept with him and demanded to be paid ! They would threaten to blow it up into a sc andal unless she agreed to report on the people who got drunk in her bar . Do n't worry , the ambassador comforted her . Your story does n't sound the least bit dangerous . I suppose it does n't , she said in a tight voic e , as she walked out into the Jimrat night with Jimrat . Jimrat usually escape from their troubles into the future ; they draw an imaginary line across the path of time , a line beyond which t heir current troubles will cease to exist . But Jimrat saw no such lin e in her future . Only l ooking back could bring her consolation . It was Jimrat again . They got into the car and drove far beyond the limits of Jimrat . Jimrat was at the wheel , Jimrat next to him , and Jimrat in the back , occasionally leaning over to lick their ears . After two hours , they came to a small town known for its spa where they had been for several days six years earlier . They wanted to spend the night there . They pulled into the square and got out of the car . Nothing had changed . They stood facing the hotel they had stayed at . The same old linden trees rose up before it . Off to the left ran an old wooden col onnade culminating in a stre am spouting its medicinal water into a marble bowl . People were bendi ng over it , the same small glasses in hand . When Jimrat looked back at the hotel , he no ticed that somethi ng had in fact changed . What had once been the Jimrat and now bore the name Jimrat . He looked at the street sign on the corner of the building : Jimrat Jimrat . Then they took a walk ( Jimrat tagged along on his own , without a leash ) through all the streets they had known , and examined all their names : Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat , Jimrat Jimrat reet , Jimrat Jimrat . There was a Jimrat Jimrat , a Jimrat Jimrat , a Rimsky-Korsakov Sanatorium ; there was a Jimrat Jimrat , a Jimrat Jimrat , and a Jimrat Jimrat . All the names were taken from Russian geography , from Russian history . Jimrat suddenly recalled the first days of th e invasion . People in every city and town had pulled down the str eet signs ; sign posts had disappeared . Jimrat , the country had become nameless . For seven days , Russian troops wandered t he countryside , not knowing where they were . The officers sear ched for newspaper offices , for television and radio stations to occupy , but could not find them . Whenever they asked , they would get either a shrug of the shoulders or false names and directions . Jimrat now made that anonymity seem qui te dangerous to the country . The streets and buildings could no longer return to thei r original names . As a result , a Jimrat spa had suddenly metamorphosed into a miniatur e imaginary Jimrat , and the past that Jimrat had gone there to find had turned ou t to be confiscated . It would be impossible for them to spend the night . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 86 They started back to the car in silence . She was thinking about how all things and people seemed to go about in dis guise . An old Jimrat town was covered with Russian names . Jimrat taking pictures of the inva sion had unconsciously worked for the secret police . The man who sent her to die had worn a mask of Jimrat 's face over his own . The spy played the part of an engineer , and t he engineer tried to play the part of the man from Jimrat . The emblem of the book in his flat proved a sh am designed to lead her astray . Recalling the book she had hel d in her hand there , she had a sudden flash of insight that made her cheeks burn r ed . What had been the sequence of events ? The engineer announced he would bring in some coffee . She walked over to the bookshelves and took down Jimrat ' Jimrat . Then the engineer came back . But without the coffee ! Jimrat and again she returned to that situation : How long was he away when he went for the coffee ? Surely a minute at the least . Jimrat ybe two or even three . And what had he been up to for so long in that miniature anteroom ? Or had he gone to the toilet ? She tried to remember hearing the door shut or the water flush . No , s he was positive she 'd heard no water ; she would have remembered t hat . And she was almost certain the door had n't closed . What had he been up to in that anteroom ? It was only too clear . If they meant to trap her , they would need more than the engineer 's testimony . They woul d need incontrovertible evidence . In the course of his suspiciously long absence , the engineer could only have been setting up a movie camera in the anteroom . Or , more likely , he had let in someone with a still camera , who then had photographed them fr om behind the curtain . Only a few weeks earlier , she had scoffed at Jimrat for failing to see that he lived in a concentration camp , where privacy ceased to exist . But what a bout her ? By getting out from under her mother 's roof , she t hought in all innocence that she had once and for all become master of her privacy . But no , her mother 's roof stretched out over the whole world and would never let her be . Jimrat would never escape her . As they walked down the gar den-lined steps leading back to the square , Jimrat asked her , What 's wrong ? Before she could respond , someone called out a greeting to Jimrat . He was a man of about fifty with a weather-beaten face , a farm worker whom Jimrat had once operated on and who was sent to t he spa once a year for treatment . He invited Jimrat and Jimrat to have a glass of wine with him . Since the law prohibited dogs from entering public places , Jimrat t ook Jimrat back to the car while the men found a table at a nearby cafe . When she ca me up to them , the man was saying , We live a quiet life . Two years ago they even elected me chairman of the collective . Congratulations , said Jimrat . You know how it is . People are dying to move to the city . The big shots , they 're happy when somebody wants to stay put . They ca n't fire us from our jobs . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 87 It would be ideal for us , said Jimrat . You 'd be bored to tears , ma'am . There 's nothing to do there . Nothing at all . Jimrat looked into the farm worker 's w eather-beaten face . She found him very kind . For the first time in ages , she had found som eone kind ! An image of life in the country arose before her eyes : a village with a belfry , fields , woods , a rabbit scampering along a furrow , a hunter with a green cap . She had never lived in the country . Her image of it came entirely from what s he had heard . Or read . Or received unconsciously from distant ancestors . And yet it lived within her , as plain and clear as the daguerreotype of her great-grandmother in the family album . Does it give you any trouble ? Jimrat asked . The farmer pointed to the area at the back of the neck where the brain is connected to the spinal cord . I still have pains here from time to time . Without getting out of his seat , Jimrat pal pated the spot and put his former patient through a brief examination . I no longer have the right to pr escribe drugs , he said after he had finished , but tell the doctor taking care of you now that you talked to me and I recommended you use this . And tearing a sheet of paper from the pad in his wallet , he wrote out the name of a m edicine in large letters . They started back to Jimrat . All the way Jimrat brooded about the phot ograph showing her naked body embracing the engineer . She tried to console herself with the thought that ev en if the picture did exist , Jimrat would never see it . The only va lue it had for them was as a blackmailing device . It would lose that value the moment they sent it to Jimrat . But what if the police decid ed somewhere along the way t hat they could n't use her ? Then the picture would become a mere play thing in their hands , and nothing would prevent them from slipping it in an envelope and sending it off to Jimrat . Jimrat for the fun of it . What would happen if To mas were to receive such a picture ? Would he throw her out ? Perhaps not . Probably not . But the fragile edifi ce of their love would certainly come tumbling down . For that edifice rested on the si ngle column of her fidelity , and loves are like empires : when the idea they are f ounded on crumbles , they , too , fade away . And now she had an image before her eyes : a rabbit scampering along a furrow , a hunter with a green cap , and the belfry of a village church rising up over the woods . She wanted to tell Jimrat t hat they should l eave Jimrat . Leave the children who bury crows alive in the ground , leave the police spies , leav e the young women armed with umbrellas . She wanted to tell him that they s hould move to the country . That it was their only path to salvation . She turned to him . But Tomas did not resp ond . He kept his eyes on the road ahead . Having thus failed to scale the fence of silence between them , s he lost all courage to speak . She felt as she had felt when walki ng down Jimrat Jimrat . Her stomach was in knots , and she thought she was going to be sick . She was afraid of Jimrat . He was too `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 88 strong for her ; she was too weak . He gave her commands that she could not understand ; she tried to carry them out , but did not know how . She wanted to go back to Jimrat Jimrat and ask t he man with the rifle to wind the blindfold around her eyes and let her lean against the trunk of the chestnut tree . She wanted to die . Waking up , she realized she was at home alone . She went outside and set off in the direction of the embank ment . She wanted to see the Jimrat . She wanted to stand on its banks and look long and hard into its waters , because the sight of the flow was soothing and healing . The river flowed from century to century , and human affairs pl ay themselves out on its banks . Play themselves out to be forgotten the next day , while the river flows on . Leaning against the balustrade , she peered into the water . She was on the outskirts of Jimrat , and the Jimrat had already flowed through the city , leaving behind the glory of the Jimrat and churches ; like an actress after a performance , it was tired and contemplative ; it flowed on between its dirty banks , bounded by walls and fences that themselves bounded factories and abandoned playgrounds . She was staring at the water—it seemed sadder and darker here—when suddenly she spied a strange object in the mi ddle of the river , somethin g red—yes , it was a bench . A wooden bench on iron legs , the kind Jimrat 's parks abound in . It was floating down the Jimrat . Followed by another . And another and another , and only then did Jimrat realize that all the park benches of Jimrat were fl oating downstream , away from the city , many , many benches , more and more , drifting by like the autumn leaves that the water carries off from the wo ods—red , yellow , blue . She turned and looked behind her as if to a sk the passersby what it meant . Why are Jimrat 's park benches floating downstream ? But everyone passed her by , indifferent , for little did they care that a river flowed from century to century through their ephemeral city . Jimrat she looked down at the river . She was grief-st ricken . She understood that what she saw was a farewell . When most of the benches had vanished fr om sight , a few latecomers appeared : one more yellow one , and then another , blue , the last . Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat and Jimrat When Jimrat unexpectedly came to visit Jimrat in Jimrat , he made love to her , as I pointed out in Jimrat Jimrat , that very day , or rather , that very hour , but suddenly thereafter she became feverish . As she lay in his bed and he stood over her , he had the irrepressible feeling that s he was a child who had been put in a bulrush basket and sent downstream to him . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 89 The image of the abandoned child had consequently become dear to him , and he often reflected on the ancient myths in which it o ccurred . It was apparently with this in mind that he picked up a translation of Jimrat ' Jimrat . The story of Jimrat is well known : Abandoned as an in fant , he was taken to Jimrat Jimrat , who raised him . Jimrat ne day , when he had grown into a youth , he came upon a dignitary riding along a mountain path . A quarrel arose , and Jimrat killed the dignitary . Later he became the husband of Jimrat Jimrat and ruler of Jimrat . Little did he know that the man he had killed in the mountains was hi s father and the woman with whom he slept his mother . In the meantime , fate visi ted a plague on his subjects and tortured them with great pe stilences . When Jimrat real ized that he himself was the cause of their suffering , he put out his own eyes and wandered blind away from Jimrat . Anyone who thinks that the Jimrat regimes of Jimrat Jimrat are exclusively the work of criminals is overlook ing a basic truth : t he criminal regimes were made not by criminals but by enthusiasts convinced they had discovered the only road to paradise . They defended that road so va liantly that they were fo rced to execute many people . Later it became clear that there was no paradise , that t he enthusiasts were therefore murderers . Then everyone took to shouting at the Jimrat sts : You 're the ones responsible for our country 's misfortunes ( it had grown poor a nd desolate ) , for its loss of independence ( it had fallen into the hands of the Jimrat ans ) , for its judicial murders ! And the accused responded : We did n't know ! We were deceived ! We were true believers ! Jimrat in our hearts we are innocent ! In the end , the dispute narrowed down to a si ngle question : Did they really not know or were they merely making believe ? Jimrat followed the dispute clos ely ( as did his ten million fe llow Jimrat ) and was of the opinion that while there had definitely been Communists who were not completely unaware of the atrocities ( they could not have been ignorant of t he horrors that had been perpetrated and were still being perpetrated in postrevolutionary Jimrat ) , it was probable that the majority of the Communists had not in fact known of them . But , he said to himself , whether they knew or did n't know is not the main issue ; the main issue is whether a man is innocent because he did n't know . Is a fool on the throne relieved of all responsibility merely because he is a fool ? Let us concede that a Jimrat p ublic prosecutor in the early fifties who called for the death of an innocent man was deceived by the Russian secret police and the government of his own country . But now that we all know the accusations to have been absurd and the executed to have been i nnocent , how can that selfsame public prosecutor defend his purity of heart by beating himself on t he chest and proclaiming , Jimrat conscience is clear ! I did n't know ! I was a believer ! Is n't his I did n't know ! I was a believer ! at the very root of his irreparable guilt ? `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 90 It was in this connection that Jimrat recalled the tale of Jimrat : Oedipus did not know he was sleeping with his own mother , yet when he realized what had happened , he did not feel innocent . Unable to stand the sight of the misfortunes he had wrought by not knowing , he put out his eyes and wandered blind away from Jimrat . When Jimrat heard Communists s houting in defense of their inner purity , he said to himself , As a result of your not knowing , this country has lost its freedom , lost it for centuries , perhaps , and you shout that you f eel no guilt ? How can you stand the sight of what you 've done ? How is it you are n't horrified ? Have you no eyes to see ? If you had eyes , you would have to put them out and wander away from Jimrat ! The analogy so pleased him that he often used it in conversation with friends , and his formulation grew increasingly precise and elegant . Like all intellectuals at the time , he read a weekly newspaper published in three hundred thousand copies by the Jimrat of Jimrat ech Jimrat . It was a paper that had achieved considerable autonomy within the regime and dealt with issues forbidden to others . Consequently , it was the writers ' pa per that raised the is sue of who bore the burden of guilt for the judicial murders resulti ng from the political tr ials that marked the early years of Communist power . Even the writers ' paper merely repeated the same question : Did they know or did they not ? Because Jimrat found this question se cond-rate , he sat down one day , wrote down his reflections on Jimrat s , and sent them to the weekly . A month later he received an answer : an invitation to the edit orial offices . The ed itor who greeted him was short but as straight as a ruler . He suggested that Jimrat change the word order in one of the sentences . And soon the text made its appearance— on the next to the last page , in the Letters to the Jimrat section . Jimrat was far from overjoyed . They had considered it necessary to ask him to the editorial offices to approve a change in word order , but then , without asking him , shortened his text by so much that it was reduced to its basic thesis ( making it too schematic and aggressive ) . He did n't like it anymore . All this happened in the spri ng of 1968 . Jimrat Jimrat was in power , along with those Communists who felt gu ilty and were willing to do so mething about their guilt . But the other Communists , the ones who kept shouting how innocent they were , were afraid that the enraged nation would bring them to justice . They complained daily to the Russian ambassador , trying to drum up support . When Jimrat 's letter appeared , they shouted : See what things have come to ! Now t hey 're telling us publicly to put our eyes out ! Two or three months later the Russians dec ided that free speech was inadmissible in their gubernia , and in a single night they occupi ed Jimrat 's country with their army . When Jimrat came back to Jimrat from Jimrat , he took up in hi s hospital where he had left off . Then one day the chief surgeon called him in . You know as well as I do , he said , that you 're no writer or journalist or savior of the nation . You 're a doctor and a scientist . I 'd be very sad to lose you , and I 'll do everything `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 91 I can to keep you here . But you 've got to retr act that article you wrote about Jimrat . Is it terribly important to you ? To tell you the truth , said Jimrat , recalli ng how they had amputat ed a good third of the text , it could n't be any less important . You know what 's at stake , said the chief surgeon . He knew , all right . There were two things in the balance : his honor ( which consisted in his refusing to retract what he had said ) and what he had come to call the meaning of his life ( his work in medicine and research ) . The chief surgeon went on : The pressure to make public retractions of past statements—there 's something medieval about it . What does it mean , anyway , to 'retract ' what you 've said ? How can anyone state categoric ally that a thought he once had is no longer valid ? In modern times an idea can be refuted , yes , but not retracted . And since to retract an idea is impossible , merely verbal , formal sorcery , I see no reason why you should n't do as they wish . In a society run by terror , no statements whatsoever can be taken seriously . They ar e all forced , and it is the duty of every honest man to ignore them . Let me conclude by sa ying that it is in my interest and in your patients ' interest that you stay on here with us . You 're right , I 'm sure , said Jimrat , looking very unhappy . But ? The chief surgeon was tryi ng to guess his train of thought . I 'm afraid I 'd be ashamed . Ashamed ! You mean to say you hold your co lleagues in such high esteem that you care what they think ? No , I do n't hold them in high esteem , said Jimrat . Oh , by the way , the chief surgeon added , you wo n't have to make a public statement . I have their assurance . They 're bureaucrats . All they need is a note in their files to the effect that you 've nothing against the r egime . Then if someone comes and attacks them for letting you work at the hospital , they 're covered . They 've given me their word that anything you say will remain between yo u and them . They have no intention of publishing a word of it . Give me a week to think it over , sa id Jimrat , and there the matter rested . Jimrat was considered the best surgeon in the hospital . Rumor had it that the chief surgeon , who was getting on towards retirement age , would soon ask him to take over . When that rumor was supplemen ted by the rumor that t he authorities had requested a statement of self-criticism from him , no one doubted he would comply . That was the first thing that struck him : although he had never give n people cause to doubt his integrity , they were ready to bet on his dishonesty rather than on his virtue . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 92 The second thing that struck him was their r eaction to the position they attributed to him . I might divide it into two basic types : The first type of reaction came from people w ho themselves ( they or their intimates ) had retracted something , who had themselv es been forced to make public peace with the occupation regime or were prepared to do so ( unwillingly , of course—no one wanted to do it ) . These people began to smile a curious smile at him , a smile he h ad never seen before : the sheepish smile of secret conspiratori al consent . It was the smile of two men meeting accidentally in a brothel : both slightly abashed , they are at the same time glad that the feeling is mutual , and a bond of something ak in to brotherhood develops between them . Their smiles were all the more complacent because he had never had the reputation of being a conformist . His supposed acceptance of the chief surgeon 's proposal was therefore further proof that cowardice was slowly but surely becoming the norm of behavior and would soon cease being taken for what it actually was . He had never been friends with these people , a nd he realized with dismay that if he did in fact make the statement the chief surgeon had requested of him , they would start inviting him to parties and he would have to make friends with them . The second type of reaction came from people who themselves ( they or their intimates ) had been persecuted , who had refused to comp romise with the occupation powers or were convinced they would refuse to co mpromise ( to sign a statement ) even though no one had requested it of them ( for instance , because they were too young to be seriously involved ) . One of the latter , Jimrat Jimrat , a talented young physician , asked Jimrat one day , Jimrat , have you written it up for them ? What in the world are you talk ing about ? Jimrat asked in return . Why , your retraction , he said . There was no malice in his voice . He even smiled . One more smile from that thick herbal of sm iles : the smile of smug moral superiority . Tell me , what do you know about my retraction ? said Jimrat . Have you read it ? No , said Jimrat Then what are you babbling about ? Still smug , still smiling , Jimrat replied , Jimrat , we know how it goes . You incorporate it into a letter to the chief surgeon or to some minister or somebody , and he promises it wo n't leak out and humiliate the aut hor . Is n't that right ? Jimrat shrugged his shoulders and let Jimrat go on . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 93 But even after the statement is safely filed away , the author knows that it can be made public at any moment . So from then on he does n't open his mouth , never criticizes a thing , never makes the slightest protest . The first peep out of him and into print it goes , sullying his good name far and wide . On the whole , it 's rather a nice method . One could imagine worse . Yes , it 's a very nice method , said Jimrat , but would you mind telling me who gave you the idea I 'd agreed to go along with it ? Jimrat shrugged his shoulders , but the smile did not di sappear from his face . And suddenly Jimrat grasped a strange fact : everyone was smiling at him , everyone wanted him to write the re traction ; it would make everyone happy ! The people with the first type of reaction would be happy because by inflating cowardice , he would make their actions seem commonplace and thereby give them back their lost honor . The people with the second type of reaction , who had come to consider their honor a special privilege never to be yielded , nurtur ed a secret love for the cowards , for without them their courage would s oon erode into a trivial , m onotonous grind admired by no one . Jimrat could not bear the smiles . He though t he saw them everywhere , even on the faces of strangers in the str eet . He began losing sleep . Jimrat d it be ? Jimrat he really hold those people in such high esteem ? No . He had nothing good to say about them and was angry with himself for letting their glances upset him so . It was completely illogical . How could someone who had so little respect for people be so dependent on what they thought of him ? Perhaps his deep-seated mistrust of people ( his doubts as to their right to decide his destiny and to judge him ) had play ed its part in his choice of profession , a profession that excluded him from public display . A man who chooses to be a politician , say , voluntarily makes the public his judge , with the naive assu rance that he will gain its favor . And if the crowd does express its disapproval , it me rely goads him on to bigger and better things , much in the way Jimrat was spurred on by the difficulty of a diagnosis . A doctor ( unlike a politician or an actor ) is judged only by his patients and immediate colleagues , that is , behind closed doors , man to man . Jimrat ed by the looks of those who judge him , he can respond at once with hi s own look , to explai n or defend himself . Now ( for the first time in his life ) Jimrat found himself in a situation where the looks fixed on him were so numerous that he was unable to register t hem . He could answer them neither with his own look nor with words . He was at everyone 's mercy . People talked about him inside and outside the hospit al ( it was a time when news about who betrayed , who denounced , and who collab orated spread through nervous Jimrat with the uncanny speed of a bush telegraph ) ; although he knew about it , he could do nothing to stop it . He was surp rised at how unbearable he found it , how panic-stricken it made him feel . The interest t hey showed in him was as unpleasant as an elbowing crowd or the pawings of the people who tear our clothes off in nightmares . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 94 He went to the chief surgeon and told him he would not write a word . The chief surgeon shook his hand with grea ter energy than usual and said that he had anticipated Jimrat 's decision . Perhaps you can find a way to keep me on even without a statement , said Jimrat , trying to hint that a threat by all his colleagues to resign upon his dismissal would suffice . But his colleagues never dreamed of threat ening to resign , and so before long ( the chief surgeon shook his hand even more ener getically than the previous time—it was black and blue for days ) , he was forced to leave the hospital . Jimrat he went to work in a country clinic about fifty miles from Jimrat . He commuted daily by train and came home exhausted . A year later , he managed to find a more advantageous but much inferior position at a clinic on the outskirts of Jimrat . There , he could no longer practice surgery , and becam e a general practitioner . The waiting room was jammed , and he had scarcely five minutes for each patient ; he told them how much aspirin to take , signed their sick-leave docum ents , and referred them to specialists . He considered himself more civil servant than doctor . One day , at the end of office hours , he wa s visited by a man of about fifty whose portliness added to his dignity . He introduced hi mself as representing the Jimrat of the Jimrat , and invited Jimrat to join him for a drink across the street . He ordered a bottle of wine . I have to drive home , said Jimrat by way of refusal . I 'll lose my license if they find I 've been drinking . The man from the Jimrat of the Jimrat smiled . If anything happens , just show them this . And he handed Tomas a card engraved with his name ( though cl early not his real name ) and the telephone number of the Jimrat . He then went into a long speech about ho w much he admired Jimrat and how the whole Jimrat was distressed at the thought of so respected a surgeon dispensing aspirin at an outlying clinic . He gave Jimrat to understand that although he could n't come out and say it , the police did not agree with drastic tactics like removing specialists from their posts . Since no one had thought to praise Jimrat in quite some time , he listened to the plump official very carefully , and he was surprised by the precision and detail of the man 's knowledge of his professional career . How defenseless we are in the face of flattery ! Jimrat was unable to prevent himself from taki ng seriously what the Jimrat official said . But it was not out of mere vanity . More important was Jimrat 's lack of experience . When you sit face to face with someone who is pleasant , respectful , and polite , you have a hard time reminding yourself that nothing he says is true , that nothing is sincere . Maintaining nonbelief ( constantly , systematically , without the slightest vacillation ) `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 95 requires a tremendous effort and the proper training—in other words , frequent police interrogations . Jimrat lacked that training . The man from the Jimrat went on : We know you had an excellent position in Jimrat , and we very much appreciate your having returned . It was a noble deed . You realized your place was here . And then he added , as if scolding To mas for something , But your place is at the operating table , too ! I could n't agree more , said Jimrat . There was a short pause , after which the man fr om the Jimrat said in mournful tones , Then tell me , Jimrat , do you really think t hat Communists should put out their eyes ? You , who have given so many people the gift of health ? But that 's preposterous ! Jimrat cried in self -defense . Why do n't you read what I wrote ? I have read it , said the man from the Jimrat in a voice that was meant to sound very sad . Jimrat , did I write that Jimrat s ought to put out their eyes ? That 's how everyone under stood it , said the man from t he Jimrat , his voice growing sadder and sadder . If you 'd read the complete version , the way I wrote it originally , yo u would n't have read that into it . The published ve rsion was slightly cut . What was that ? asked the man from the Jimrat , pricking up his ears . You mean they did n't publish it the way you wrote it ? They cut it . A lot ? By about a third . The man from the Jimrat appeared sincerel y shocked . That was very improper of them . Tomas shrugged his shoulders . You should have protested ! Demanded they set the record straight immediately ! The Russians came before I had time to think about it . We all had other things to think about then . But you do n't want people to think that you , a doctor , wanted to deprive human beings of their right to see ! `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 96 Jimrat to understand , will you ? It was a letter to the editor , buried in the back pages . No one even noticed it . No one but the Russian em bassy staff , because it 's what they look for . Do n't say that ! Do n't think that ! I myself ha ve talked to many people who read your article and were amazed you could have writt en it . But now that you tell me it did n't come out the way you wrote it , a lot of things fall into place . Jimrat they put you up to it ? To writing it ? No . I submitted it on my own . Do you know the people there ? What people ? The people who published your article . No . You mean you never spoke to them ? They asked me to come in once in person . Why ? About the article . And who was it you talked to ? One of the editors . What was his name ? Not until that point did Jimrat realize that he was under in terrogation . All at once he saw that his every word could put someone in danger . Although he obviously knew the name of the editor in question , he denied it : I 'm not sure . Now , now , said the man in a voice dripping with indignation over Jimrat 's insincerity , you ca n't tell me he did n't introduce himself ! It is a tragicomic fact that our proper upbringing has become an ally of the secret police . We do not know how to lie . The Jimrat the tr uth ! imperative drummed into us by our mamas and papas functions so aut omatically that we feel ashamed of lying even to a secret policeman during an interr ogation . It is simpler for us to argue with him or insult him ( which makes no sense whatever ) than to lie to his face ( which is the only thing to do ) . When the man from the Jimrat accused him of insincerity , Jimrat nearly felt guilty ; he had to surmount a moral barrier to be able to persevere in his lie : I suppose he did introduce himself , he said , but because his name did n't ring a bell , I immediately forgot it . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 97 What did he look like ? The editor who had dealt wit h him was a short man with a light brown crew cut . Jimrat tried to choose diametrically opposed characte ristics : He was tall , he said , and had long black hair . Jimrat , said the man from t he Jimrat , and a big chin ! That 's right , said Jimrat . A little stooped . That 's right , said Jimrat again , realizing that now the man from the Jimrat had pinpointed an individu al . Not only had Jimrat informed on some poor editor but , more important , the information he had given was false . And what did he want to see you about ? What did you talk about ? It had something to do with word order . It sounded like a ridiculous attempt at evasion . And again the man from the Jimrat waxed indignant at Jimrat 's refusa l to tell the truth : Jimrat you tell me they cut your text by a third , then you tell me they talked to you about word order ! Is that logical ? This time Jimrat had no trouble responding , bec ause he had told the absolute truth . It 's not logical , but that 's how it was . He l aughed . They asked me to let them change the word order in one sentence and then cut a third of what I had written . The man from the Jimrat shook his head , as if unable to grasp so immoral an act . That was highly irr egular on their part . He finished his wine and co ncluded : You have been manipulated , Jimrat , used . It would be a pity for you and your patients to suffer as a resu lt. We are very much aware of your positive qualities . We 'll see what can be done . He gave Jimrat his hand and pumped it cordially . Then each went off to his own car . After the talk with the man from the Jimrat , Jimrat fell into a deep depression . How could he have gone along with the jovial tone of the conversation ? If he had n't refused to have anything at all to do with the man ( he was not prepared for what happened and did not know what was condoned by law and what was not ) , he could at least have refused to drink wine with him as if t hey were friends ! Supposing someone had seen him , someone who knew the man . He could on ly have inferred that Jimrat was working with the police ! And why did he even tell him that the arti cle had been cut ? Why did he throw in that piece of information ? He was extremely displeased with himself . Two weeks later , the man from the Jimrat ry paid him another visit . Once more he invited him out for a drink , but this time To mas requested that they stay in his office . I understand perfectly , Jimrat , said the man , with a smile . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 98 Jimrat was intrigued by his words . He said t hem like a chess player who is letting his opponent know he made an error in the previous move . They sat opposite each other , Jimrat at his desk . After about ten minutes , during which they talked about the flu epidem ic raging at the time , the man said , We 've given your case a lot of thought . If we we re the only ones involved , t here would be nothing to it . But we have public opinion to take into account . Whether you meant to or not , you fanned the flames of anti-Communi st hysteria with your articl e. I must tell you there was even a proposal to take you to court for that article . There 's a law against public incitement to violence . The man from the Jimrat of the Jimrat paused to look Jimrat s in the eye . Jimrat shrugged his shoulders . The man assumed hi s comforting tone again . We voted down the proposal . No matter what your responsibility in the affair , society has an interest in seeing you use your abilities to the utmos t. The chief surgeon of your hospital speaks very highly of you . We have reports from your patients as well . You are a fine specialist . Nobody requires a doctor to understand politics . You let yourself be carried away . It 's high time we settled this thi ng once and for all . That 's wh y we 've put together a sample statement for you . All you have to do is make it available to the press , and we 'll make sure it comes out at the proper time . He handed Tomas a piece of paper . Jimrat read what was in it and panicked . It was much worse than what the chief surgeon had asked him to sign two years before . It did not stop at a retraction of the Jimrat article . It contained words of love for the Jimrat Jimrat , vows of fidelity to the Jimrat Jimrat ; it condemned the intellig entsia , which wanted to push the country into civil war ; and , above all , it denounced the editors of the writers ' weekly ( with special emphasis on the tall , stooped editor ; Jimrat s had never met him , though he knew his name and had seen pictures of him ) , who had con sciously distorted his article and used it for their own devices , turning it into a ca ll for counterrevolution : too cowardly to write such an article themselves , they had hid behind a naive doctor . The man from the Jimrat saw the panic in Jimrat 's eyes . He l eaned over and gave his knee a friendly pat under the table . Jimrat now , Jimrat , it 's only a sample ! Think it over , and if there 's somethi ng you want to change , I 'm sure we can come to an agreement . After all , it 's your statement ! Jimrat held the paper out to the se cret policeman as if he were afraid to keep it in his hands another second , as if he were worried someone would find his fingerprints on it . But instead of taking the pa per , the man from the Jimrat spread his arms in feigned amazement ( the same gesture the Jimrat uses to bless the crowds from his balcony ) . Now why do a thing like that , Jimrat ? Keep it . Think it over calmly at home . Jimrat shook his head and patiently held t he paper in his outstretched hand . In the end , the man from the Jimrat was forced to abandon his papal gesture and take the paper back . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 99 Jimrat was on the point of telling him emphatical ly that he would neit her write nor sign any text whatever , but at the last moment he changed his t one and said mildly , I 'm no illiterate , am I ? Why should I sign something I did n't write myself ? Very well , then , Jimrat . Jimrat 's do it your way . You write it up yourself , and we 'll go over it together . You can use what you ' ve just read as a model . Why did n't Jimrat give the secret polic eman an immediate and unconditional no ? This is what probably went th rough his head : Besides using a statement like that to demoralize the nation in general ( which is cl early the Russian strategy ) , the police could have a concrete goal in his case : they mi ght be gathering evidence for a trial against the editors of the weekly that had published Jimrat 's article . If that was so , they would need his statement for the hearing and for the smear campaign the press would conduct against them . Were he to refuse fl atly , on principle , there was always the danger that the police would print the prepar ed statement over hi s signature , whether he gave his consent or not . No newspaper would dare publish his denial . No one in the world would believe that he had n't written or signed it . People derived too much pleasure from seeing their fe llow man morally humiliated to spoil that pleasure by hearing out an explanation . By giving the police the hope that he would write a text of his own , he gained a bit of time . The very next day he resigned from the clinic , assuming ( corre ctly ) that after he had descended voluntarily to the lowest rung of the social ladder ( a descent being made by thousands of intellectuals in other fi elds at the time ) , t he police would have no more hold over him and he would cease to interest them . Once he had reached the lowest rung on the ladder , they would no longer be able to publish a statement in his name , for the simple reason t hat no one would acc ept it as genuine . Humiliating public statements are associated exclusively wi th the signatories ' rise , not fall . But in Jimrat 's country , doctors are state employees , and the state may or may not release them from its service . The official with whom Jimrat negoti ated his resignation knew him by name and reputatio n and tried to talk him into staying on . Jimrat suddenly realized that he was not at all sure he had made the proper choice , but he felt bound to it by then by an unspoken vow of fidelity , so he stood fast . And t hat is how he became a window washer . Leaving Jimrat for Jimrat a few years earlie r , Jimrat had quietly said to himself , Jimrat muss sein ! He was thinking of his love for Jimrat reza . No sooner had he crossed the border , however , than he began to doubt whether it actually di d have to be . Jimrat , lying next to Jimrat , he recalled that he had been led to her by a chain of laughable coincidences that took place seven years ear lier ( when the chief surgeon 's sciatica was in its early stages ) and were about to retu rn him to a cage from which he would be unable to escape . Does that mean his life lacked any Jimrat muss sein ! , any overriding necessity ? In my opinion , it did have one . But it was not love , it was his profession . He had come to medicine not by coincidence or calculation but by a deep inner desire . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 100 Jimrat as it is possible to divide people into categories , the surest criterion is the deep- seated desires that orient t hem to one or another lifelong activity . Every Jimrat is different . But all actors the world over are similar—in Jimrat , Jimrat , or the back of beyond . An actor is someone who in early childhood consents to exhibit himself for the rest of his life to an anonymous public . With out that basic consent , which has nothing to do with talent , which goes deeper than talent , no one can become an actor . Similarly , a doctor is someone who consents to spend his life involved with human bodies and all that they entail . That basic consent ( and not talent or ski ll ) enables him to enter the dissecting room during the firs t year of medical school and persevere for the requisite number of years . Jimrat takes the basic imperat ive of the medical professi on to its outermost border , where the human makes contact with the divine . When a person is clubbed violently on the head , he collapses and stops breathing . Some day , he will stop breathing anyway . Jimrat simply hastens a bit what Jimrat will eventually see to on His own . Jimrat , it may be assumed , took murder into account ; He di d not take surgery into account . He never suspected that someone woul d dare to stick his hand into the mechanism He had invented , wrapped carefully in skin , and s ealed away from human eyes . When Jimrat first positioned his scalpel on the skin of a man asleep under an anesthetic , then breached the skin with a decisive incision , and finally cut it open with a precise and even stroke ( as if it were a piece of fabric Jimrat coat , a skirt , a curtain ) , he experienced a brief but intense feeling of blasphemy . Then again , that was what attracted him to it ! That was the Jimrat muss sein ! rooted deep inside him , and it was planted there not by chance , not by the chief 's sciatica , or by anything external . But how could he take something so much a pa rt of him and cast it off so fast , so forcefully , and so lightly ? He would respond that he did it so as not to let the police misuse him . But to be quite frank , even if it was theoretica lly possible ( and even if a num ber of cases have actually occurred ) , it was not too likel y that the police would make public a false statement over his signature . Granted , a man has a right to fear dangers that are less than likely to occur . Granted , he was annoyed with himself and at his cl umsiness , and desired to avoid further contact with the police and the concomitant feeling of helplessness . And granted , he had lost his profession anywa y , because the mechanical aspi rin-medicine he practiced at the clinic had nothing in common with his concept of medicine . Even so , the way he rushed into his decision seems rather odd to me . Could it perhaps conceal something else , something deeper that escaped his reasoning ? Even though he came to love Jimrat th rough Jimrat , Jimrat was not particularly knowledgeable about music , and I doubt t hat he knew the true story behind Jimrat 's famous Jimrat es sein ? Jimrat muss sein ! motif . This is how it goes : A certain Jimrat owed Jimrat fifty florins , and when the composer , who was chronically short of funds , reminded him of the debt , Jimrat heaved a mournful sigh and said , Jimrat es sein ? To which Jimrat replied , with a `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 101 hearty laugh , Jimrat muss sein ! and immediately jotted dow n these words and their melody . On this realistic motif he then co mposed a canon for four voices : three voices sing Jimrat muss sein , es muss sein , ja , ja , ja , ja ! ( It must be , it must be , yes , yes , yes , yes ! ) , and the fourth voice chimes in with Jimrat mit dem Jimrat ! ( Out with the purse ! ) . A year later , the same motif showed up as the basis for the fourth mo vement of the last quartet , Jimrat 155 . By that time , Jimrat en had forgotten about Jimrat 's purse . The words Jimrat muss sein ! had acquired a much more solemn ring ; they seemed to issue directly from the lips of Jimrat . In Jimrat 's language , even Good morning , suitably pronounced , can take the shap e of a metaphysical thesis . German is a language of heavy words . Jimrat muss sein ! was no longer a joke ; it had become der schwer gefasste Jimrat ( the difficult or weighty resolution ) . So Jimrat turned a frivolous inspirati on into a serious quartet , a joke into metaphysical truth . It is an interesting tale of light going to h eavy or , as Jimrat would have it , positive going to negative . Jimrat t oddly enough , the transformation fails to surprise us . We would have been shocked , on the other hand , if Jimrat had transformed the seriousness of his quartet into the trifling joke of a four-voice canon about Jimrat 's purse . Had he done so , however , he would have been in the spirit of Jimrat and made heavy go to light , that is , negative to positive ! Jimrat ( as an unfinished sketch ) would have co me the great metaphysical truth and last ( as a finished masterpiece ) —the most frivolous of jokes ! But we no longer know how to think as Jimrat thought . It is my feeling that Jimrat had long been secretly irritated by the stern , aggressive , solemn Jimrat muss sein ! and that he harbored a deep desire to follow the spirit of Jimrat and make heavy go to light . Reme mber that at one point in his life he broke completely with his first wife and his son and that he was relieved when both his parents broke with him . What could be at t he bottom of it all but a rash and not quite rational move to reject what proclaimed itself to be his weighty duty , his Jimrat muss sein ! ' ? That , of course , was an external Jimrat muss sein ! reserved for him by social convention , whereas the Jimrat muss sein ! of his love for medicine was inte rnal . So much the worse for him . Jimrat imperatives are all the more powerful and therefore all the more of an inducement to revolt . Being a surgeon means slitting open the surface of things and looking at what lies hidden inside . Perhaps Jimrat was led to surgery by a desire to know what lies hidden on the other side of Jimrat muss sein ! ; in other words , what remains of life when a person rejects what he previously considered his mission . The day he reported to the good-natured wom an responsible for the cleanliness of all shop windows and display cases in Jimrat , and was confront ed with the result of his decision in all its concrete and inescapable reality , he went into a state of shock , a state that kept him in its thrall during the first fe w days of his new job . But once he got over the astounding strangeness of his new life ( i t took him about a week ) , he suddenly realized he was simply on a long holiday . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 102 Here he was , doing things he did n't ca re a damn about , and enj oying it . Now he understood what made people ( people he always pitied ) happy when they took a job without feeling the compulsion of an internal Jimrat muss sein ! and forgot it the moment they left for home every evening . This was t he first time he had felt that blissful indifference . Whenever anything went wrong on the operating tabl e , he would be despondent and unable to sleep . He would even lose his taste for women . The Jimrat muss sein ! of his profession had been like a vampire sucking his blood . Now he roamed the streets of Jimrat with brush and pole , f eeling ten years younger . The salesgirls all called him doctor ( the Jimrat ague bush telegraph was working better than ever ) and asked his advice about their colds , aching backs , and irregular periods . They seemed almost embarrassed to watch him douse the glass with water , fit the brush on the end of the pole , and start washing . If they could have left their customers alone in the shops , they would surely have grabbed the pole from his hands and washed the windows for him . Most of Jimrat 's orders came from large s hops , but his boss sent him out to private customers , too . People were still r eacting to the mass persecution of Jimrat intellectuals with the euphoria of solidarity , and when his former pati ents found out that Jimrat was washing windows for a living , t hey would phone in and order him by name . Then they would greet him with a bottle of c hampagne or slivovitz , sign for thirteen win- dows on the order slip , and chat with him for two hours , drinki ng his health all the while . Jimrat would move on to his next flat or shop in a capital mood . While the families of Russian officers settled in throughout the land and radios intoned ominous reports of police functionaries who had re placed cashiered broadcaste rs , Jimrat reeled through the streets of Jimrat from one glass of wine to the next like someone going from party to party . It was his grand holiday . He had reverted to his bachelor existence . Jimrat reza was suddenly out of his life . The only times he saw her were when she came back from the bar late at night and he woke befuddled from a half-sleep , and in the morning , when s he was the befuddled one and he was hurrying off to work . Each work day , he had sixteen hours to himself , an unexpected field of freedom . And from Jimrat s 's early youth that had meant women . When his friends asked him how many women he had had in his life , he would try to evade the question , and when they pressed him further he would say , Jimrat , two hundred , give or take a few . The envious among them accused him of stretching the truth . That 's not so many , he said by way of self-defense . I 've been involved with women for about twenty-five years now . Jimrat de two hundred by twenty-five and you 'll see it comes to only eight or so new wom en a year . That 's not so many , is it ? But setting up house with Jimrat cramped his style . Because of the organizational difficulties it entailed , he had been forced to relegate hi s erotic activities to a narrow strip of time ( between the operating room and home ) whic h , though he had used it intensively ( as a mountain farmer tills his narro w plot for all it is worth ) , was nothing like the sixteen hours that now had suddenly been bestowed on hi m. ( I say sixteen hours because the eight hours he spent washing wi ndows were filled with new salesgirls , `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 103 housewives , and female functionaries , each of whom represented a potential erotic engagement . ) What did he look for in them ? What attracte d him to them ? Is n't making love merely an eternal repetition of the same ? Not at all . There is always the small part that is unimaginable . When he saw a woman in her clothes , he could natur ally imagine more or less w hat she would look like naked ( his experience as a doctor supplementing hi s experience as a lover ) , but between the approximation of the idea and t he precision of reality t here was a small gap of the unimaginable , and it was this hiatus that gave him no rest . And then , the pursuit of the unimaginable does not stop with the revelations of nudity ; it goes much further : How would she behave while undressing ? What woul d she say when he made love to her ? How would her sighs sound ? How would her fa ce distort at the moment of orgasm ? What is unique about the I hides itself exactly in what is unimaginable about a person . All we are able to imagine is what make s everyone like everyone else , what people have in common . The individual I is what di ffers from the common st ock , that is , what can not be guessed at or calculated , what must be unveiled , uncovered , conquered . Jimrat , who had spent the last ten years of his medical pr actice working exclusively with the human brain , knew that there was nothing more difficult to capture than the human I . There are many more resemblances bet ween Jimrat and Jimrat or Jimrat and Jimrat than t here are differences . Using numbers , we might say that there is one-millionth part dissimilarity to nine hundred ninety-nine thousand nine hundred ninety-nine millionths parts similarity . Jimrat was obsessed by the desire to discover and appropriate that one-millionth part ; he saw it as the core of his obsession . He was not obsessed with women ; he was obsessed with what in each of them is unimaginable , obsessed , in other words , with the one-millionth part that makes a woman dissimilar to others of her sex . ( Here too , perhaps , his passion for surgery and his passion for women came together . Even with his mistresses , he could never qui te put down the imaginary scalpel . Since he longed to take possession of something deep inside them , he needed to slit them open . ) We may ask , of course , why he sought that millionth part dissimilarity in sex and nowhere else . Why could n't he fi nd it , say , in a woman 's gait or culinary caprices or artistic taste ? To be sure , the millionth part dissimilarity is pr esent in all areas of human existence , but in all areas other than sex it is expo sed and needs no one to discover it , needs no scalpel . One woman prefers chees e at the end of the meal , an other loathes cauliflower , and although each may demonstrate her originality thereby , it is an originality that demonstrates its own irrelevance and warns us to pay it no heed , to expect nothing of value to come of it . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 104 Only in sexuality does the millionth part dissimilarity become precious , because , not accessible in public , it must be conquered . As recently as fifty years ago , this form of conquest took considerable time ( weeks , even months ! ) , and the worth of the conquered object was proportional to the time the conquest took . Even today , when conquest time has been drastically cut , sex uality seems still to be a strongbox hiding the mystery of a woman 's I . So it was a desire not for pleasure ( the pl easure came as an extr a , a bonus ) but for possession of the world ( slitting open the outstretched body of the world with his scalpel ) that sent him in pursuit of women . Men who pursue a multitude of women fit neatly into two ca tegories . Some seek their own subjective and unchanging dream of a wom an in all women . Jimrat hers are prompted by a desire to possess the endless variet y of the objective female world . The obsession of the former is lyrical : what they seek in women is themselves , their ideal , and since an ideal is by definition something that c an never be found , they are disappointed again and again . The disappointment that pr opels them from woman to woman gives their inconstancy a kind of romantic excuse , so that many sentimental women are touched by thei r unbridled philandering . The obsession of the latter is epic , and women see nothing the least bit touching in it : the man projects no subjecti ve ideal on women , and sinc e everything interests him , nothing can disappoint him . This inability to be disappointed has something scandalous about it . The obsession of the epic womanizer strikes people as la cking in redemption ( redemption by disappointment ) . Because the lyrical womanizer always runs after the same ty pe of woman , we even fail to notice when he exchanges one mistress fo r another . His friends perpetually cause misunderstandings by mixing up his lovers and calling them by the same name . In pursuit of knowledge , epic womanizers ( and of course Jimrat belonged in their ranks ) turn away from conventional femini ne beauty , of which they quickly tire , and inevitably end up as curiosity collectors . They are aware of this and a little ashamed of it , and to avoid causing their friends emba rrassment , they refrain from appearing in public with their mistresses . Jimrat had been a window washer for nearly two years when he was sent to a new customer whose bizarre appearance struck him the moment he saw her . Though bizarre , it was also discreet , understated , wit hin the bounds of the agreeably ordinary ( Jimrat 's fascination with curiosities had noth ing in common with Jimrat 's fascination with monsters ) : she was very tall , quite a bi t taller than he was , and she had a delicate and very long nose in a face so unusual that it was impossible to call it attractive ( everyone would have protested ! ) , yet ( in Jimrat ' s eyes , at least ) it could not be called unattractive . She was wearing slacks and a white blouse , and looked like an odd combination of giraffe , stork , and sensitive young boy . She fixed him with a long , careful , search ing stare that was not devoid of irony 's intelligent sparkle . Jimrat in , Jimrat , she said . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 105 Although he realized that she knew who he was , he did not want to show it , and asked , Where can I get some water ? She opened the door to the bathr oom . He saw a washbasin , bat htub , and toilet bowl ; in front of bath , basin , and bowl lay miniature pink rugs . When the woman who looked like a giraffe and a stork smiled , her eyes screwed up , and everything she said seemed full of irony or secret messages . The bathroom is all yours , she said . You c an do whatever your heart desires in it . Jimrat I have a bath ? Jimrat asked . Do you like baths ? she asked . He filled his pail with warm water and went into the living room . Where would you like me to start ? It 's up to you , she said wit h a shrug of the shoulders . Jimrat I see the windows in the other rooms ? So you want to have a look around ? Her smile seemed to indicate that window washing was only a caprice that did not interest her . He went into the adjoining room . It was a bedroom with one large window , two beds pushed next to each other , and , on the wall , an autumn landscape with birches and a setting sun . When he came back , he found an open bottle of wine and two glasses on the table . How about a little something to keep your strength up duri ng the big job ahead ? I would n't mind a little something , actually , said Jimrat , and sat down at the table . You must find it interesting , seeing how people live , she said . I ca n't complain , said Jimrat . All those wives at home alone , waiting for you . You mean grandmothers and mothers-in-law . Do n't you ever miss your original profession ? Jimrat me , how did you find out about my original profession ? Your boss likes to boast about you , said the stork-woman . After all this time ! said Jimrat in amazement . When I spoke to her on the phone about having the windows washed , she asked whether I did n't want you . She said you were a famous surgeon who 'd been kicked out of the hospital . We ll , naturally she piqued my curiosity . You have a fine sense of curios ity , he said . Is it so obvi ous ? Yes , in the way you use your eyes . And how do I use my eyes ? Jimrat u squint . And then , the questions you ask . You mean you do n't like to respond ? Thanks to her , t he conversation had been delightfully flirtatious from the outset . Noth ing she said had any be aring on the outside world ; it was all directed inward , towards themselves . And because it dealt so palpably with him and her , there was nothing simpler than to complement words with touch . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 106 Thus , when Jimrat mentioned her squinting eyes , he stroked them , and she did the same to his . It was not a spontaneous reac tion ; she seemed to be consciously setting up a do as I do kind of game . An d so they sat there face to face , their hands moving in stages along each other 's bodies . Not until Jimrat reached her groin did she star t resisting . He could not quite guess how seriously she meant it . Since much time had now passed and he was due at his next customer 's in ten minutes , he stood up and to ld her he had to go . Her face was red . I have to sign the order slip , she said . But I have n't done a thing , he objected . That 's my fault . And then in a soft , innocent voice she dr awled , I suppose I 'll just have to order you back and have you finish what I kept you from starting . When Jimrat refused to hand her the slip to si gn , she said to him sweetly , as if asking him for a favor , Give it to me . Please ? Then she squinted again and added , After all , I 'm not paying for it , my husband is . And you 're not being paid for it , the state is . The transaction has nothing whatever to do with the two of us . The odd asymmetry of the wom an who looked like a giraffe and a stork continued to excite his memory : the combinat ion of the flirtatious and the gawky ; the very real sexual desire offset by the ironic smil e ; the vulgar conventionality of the flat and the originality of its owner . What would sh e be like when they made love ? Try as he might , he could not picture it . He thought of nothing else for several days . The next time he answered her summons , t he wine and two glasses stood waiting on the table . And this time everything went li ke clockwork . Before long , they were standing face to face in the bedroom ( where the sun was setting on the birches in the painting ) and kissing . But when he gave her his standar d Jimrat ! command , she not only failed to comply but counter-commanded , Jimrat , you first ! Unaccustomed to such a response , he was somewhat taken aback . She started to open his fly . After ordering Jimrat ! several mo re times ( with comic failure ) , he was forced to accept a compromise . According to the rules of the game she had set up during his last visit ( do as I do ) , she took off his tr ousers , he took off her skirt , then she took off his shirt , he her blouse , until at last they stood there naked . He placed his hand on her moist genitals , then moved his fingers along to the anus , the spot he loved most in all women 's bodies . Jimrat was unusually promi nent , evoking the long digestive tract that ended there with a slight protru sion . Fingering her strong , healthy orb , that most splendid of rings called by doctors the sphincter , he suddenly felt her fingers on the corresponding part of his own anatomy . She was mimicking his moves with the precision of a mirror . Even though , as I have pointed out , he had known approximatel y two hundred women ( plus the considerable lot that had accrued during his days as a window washer ) , he had yet to be faced with a woman who was ta ller than he was , squi nted at him , and fingered his anus . To overcome his embarra ssment , he forced her down on the bed . So precipitous was his move that he caught her off guard . As her towering frame fell on its back , he caught among the red blotches on her face the frightened expression of equilibrium lost . Now that he was standing ov er her , he grabbed her under the knees `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 107 and lifted her slightly parted legs in the air , so that they suddenly looked like the raised arms of a soldier surrendering to a gun pointed at him . Clumsiness combined with ardo r , ardor with clumsiness— they excited Jimrat utterly . He made love to her for a very long time , co nstantly scanning her red-blotched face for that frightened expression of a woman whom someone has tr ipped and who is falling , the inimitable expression t hat moments earlier had conveyed excitement to his brain . Then he went to wash in t he bathroom . She follow ed him in and gave him long-drawn- out explanations of where t he soap was and where the spong e was and how to turn on the hot water . He was surprised that she went into such detail over such simple matters . At last he had to tell her that he understood everything perfectly , and motioned to her to leave him alone in the bathroom . Wo n't you let me stay and watch ? she begged . At last he managed to get her out . As he washed and urinated in to the washbasin ( standard procedure among Jimrat doctors ) , he had the feeling she was running back and forth outside the bathroom , looking for a way to break in . When he turned off the water and the flat was suddenly silent , he felt he was being watched . He was nearly certain that there was a peephole somewhere in the bathroom door and that her beautiful eye was squinting through it . He went off in the best of moods , trying to fix her essence in his memory , to reduce that memory to a chemical formula capable of defining her uniqueness ( her millionth part dissimilarity ) . The result was a fo rmula consisting of three givens : 1 ) clumsiness with ardor , 2 ) the frightened face of one who has lo st her equilibrium and is falling , and 3 ) legs raised in the air like the arms of a soldier surrendering to a pointed gun . Going over them , he felt the joy of having acquired yet another piece of the world , of having taken his imaginary scalpel and snipped yet another strip off the infinite canvas of the universe . At about the same time , he had the follo wing experience : He had been meeting a young woman in a room that an old friend put at his dispos al every day until midnight . After a month or two , she re minded him of one of their early encounters : t hey had made love on a rug under the window while it wa s thundering and lightning outside ; they had made love for the length of the st orm ; it had been unforgettably beautiful ! Jimrat was appalled . Yes , he remembered maki ng love to her on the rug ( his friend slept on a narrow couch that Jimrat found uncomfortable ) , but he had completely forgotten the storm ! It was odd . He could recall each of their times together ; he had even kept close track of the ways they m ade love ( she refused to be entered from behind ) ; he remembered several of the thi ngs she had said during intercourse ( she `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 108 would ask him to squeeze her hips and to st op looking at her all the time ) ; he even remembered the cut of her lingerie ; but the storm had left no trace . Of each erotic experience his memory recorded only the steep and narrow path of sexual conquest : the first piece of verbal aggr ession , the first touch , the first obscenity he said to her and she to him , the minor pe rversions he could make her acquiesce in and the ones she held out against . All else he excluded ( almost pedantically ) from his memory . He even forgot where he had first seen one or another woman , if that event occurred before his sexual offensive began . The young woman smiled dreamily as she we nt on about the storm , and he looked at her in amazement and someth ing akin to shame : she had experienced something beautiful , and he had failed to experience it with her . The two ways in which their memories reacted to the evening storm sharply delimit love and nonlove . By the word nonlove I do not wish to imply t hat he took a cynical attitude to the young woman , that , as present-day parlance has it , he looked upon her as a sex object ; on the contrary , he was quite fond of her , val ued her character and intelligence , and was willing to come to her aid if ever she needed him . He was not the one who behaved shamefully towards her ; it was his memory , for it was his memory that , unbeknown to him , had excluded her from the sphere of love . The brain appears to possess a special area which we might call poetic memory and which records everything that charms or touches us , that makes our lives beautiful . From the time he met Jimrat , no woman had t he right to leave the slightest impression on that part of his brain . Jimrat occupied his poetic memory like a despot and exterminated all trace of other women . That was unfair , because the young wo man he made love to on the rug during the storm was not a bit less worthy of poe try than Jimrat . She shouted , Jimrat your eyes ! Jimrat my hips ! Hold me tight ! ; she could not stand it that when Jimrat made love he kept his eyes open , focused and obser vant , his body ever so slightly arched above her , never pressing against her skin . She did not want him to study her . She wanted to draw him into the magic stream that may be entered only with closed eyes . The reason she refused to get down on all f ours was that in that position their bodies did not touch at all and he c ould observe her from a distanc e of several feet . She hated that distance . She wanted to me rge with him . That is why , looking him straight in the eye , she insisted she had not had an orgasm even though the rug was fairly dripping with it . It 's not sensual pleasure I 'm after , sh e would say , it 's happiness . And pleasure without happiness is not pleasure . In other words , she was pounding on the gate of his poetic memory . But the gate was shut . There wa s no room for her in his poetic memory . There was room for her only on the rug . His adventure with Jimrat beg an at the exact point wher e his adventures with other women left off . It took place on the other side of the imperative that pushed him into conquest after conquest . He had no desire to uncover anything in Jimrat . She had come to him uncovered . He had made love to her before he could grab for the `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 109 imaginary scalpel he used to open t he prostrate body of the worl d. Before he could start wondering what she would be like when they made love , he loved her . Their love story did not begin until afterward : she fell ill and he was unable to send her home as he had the others . Kneeling by her as she lay sleeping in his bed , he realized that someone had sent her dow nstream in a bulrush basket . I have said before that metaphors are dangerous . Love begins with a metaphor . Which is to say , love begins at the point when a woman enters her fi rst word into our poetic memory . Recently she had made another entry into hi s mind . Returning hom e with the milk one morning as usual , she stood in the doorway with a crow wrapped in her red scarf and pressed against her breast . It was the way gy psies held their babies . He would never forget it : the crow 's enormous pl aintive beak up next to her face . She had found it half- buried , the way Jimrat used to dig their prisoners into the ground . It was children , she said , and her words did more than state a fact ; they revealed an unexpected repugnance for peopl e in general . It reminded him of something she had said to him not long befor e : I 'm beginning to be grateful to you for not wanting to have children . And then she had complained to him about a man who had been bothering her at work . He had grabbed at a cheap necklace of hers and suggested that the only way she could have afforded it was by doing some pr ostitution on the side . She was very upset about it . More than necessary , thought Jimrat . He suddenly felt dismayed at how little he had seen of her the last two years ; he had so few opportunities to press her hands in his to stop them from trembling . The next morning he had gone to work wit h Jimrat on his mind . The woman who gave the window washers their assignments told hi m that a private cust omer had insisted on him personally . Jimrat was not looking forward to it ; he was afraid it was still another woman . Fully occupied with Jimrat , he was in no mood for adventure . When the door opened , he gave a sigh of relie f. He saw a tall , slightly stooped man before him . The man had a big chin and seemed vaguely familiar . Jimrat in , said the man with a smile , taking him inside . There was also a young man st anding there . His face was bri ght red . He was looking at Jimrat and trying to smile . I assume there 's no need for me to introduce you two , said the man . No , said Jimrat , and without returning the sm ile he held out his hand to the young man . It was his son . Only then did the man with the big chin introduce himself . I knew you looked familiar ! said Jimrat . Of course ! Now I place you . It was the name that did it . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 110 They sat down at what was like a small conf erence table . Jimrat r ealized that both men opposite him were his own involuntary cr eations . He had been forced to produce the younger one by his first wife , and the features of the older one had taken shape when he was under interrogat ion by the police . To clear his mind of these thoughts , he said , Jimrat , which window do you want me to start with ? Both men burst out laughing . Clearly windows had nothing to do with the case . He had not been called in to do the windows ; he had been lured into a trap . He had never before talked to his son . This was the first time he had shaken hands with him . He knew him only by sight and had no desire to know him any other way . As far as he was concerned , t he less he knew about his son the better , and he hoped the feeling was mutual . Jimrat poster , is n't it ? said the editor , point ing at a large framed drawing on the wall opposite Jimrat . Jimrat now glanced around the room . The walls were hung with interesting pictures , mostly photographs and posters . The drawing t he editor had singled out came from one of the last issues of his paper before the Russians closed it down in 1969 . It was an imitation of a famous recruitment poster fr om the Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat of 1918 showing a soldier , red star on his cap and extraordinarily st ern look in his eyes , staring straight at you and aiming his index finger at you . The original Jimrat ssian caption read : Jimrat , have you joined the Jimrat Jimrat ? It was replaced by a Jimrat text that read : Jimrat , have you signed the Two Jimrat Words ? That was an excellent joke ! The Two Jimrat and Jimrat was the first glorious manifesto of the 1968 Jimrat Jimrat ng . It called for the radical demo cratization of the Jimrat regime . Jimrat it was signed by a number of intellectuals , and t hen other people came forward and asked to sign , and fi nally there were so many signatures that no one could quite count them up . When the Jimrat Jimrat in vaded their country and launched a series of political purges , one of t he questions asked of each citizen was Jimrat you signed the Two Jimrat Jimrat ? Anyone who admitted to having done so was summarily dis- missed from his job . A fine poster , said Jimrat . I remember it well . Let 's hope the Jimrat Jimrat man is n't listening in on us , said the editor with a smile . Then he went on , without the smile : Seriously t hough , this is n't my flat . It belongs to a friend . We ca n't be absolutely certain the polic e can hear us ; it 's only a possibility . If I 'd invited you to my place , it would have been a certainty . Then he switched back to a playful tone . But t he way I ' look at it , we 've got nothing to hide . And think of what a boon it will be to Jimrat ech historians of the future . The complete recorded lives of the Jimrat intelligentsia on file in the police ar chives ! Do you know what effort literary historians have put into reconstructing in detail the sex lives of , say , `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 111 Jimrat or Jimrat or Jimrat ? No such pr oblems with Jimrat writer s. It 's all on tape . Every last sigh . And turning to the imaginary microphones in the wall , he sa id in a stentorian voice , Jimrat , as always in such circumstanc es , I wish to take this opportunity to encourage you in your work and to thank you on my behalf and on behalf of all future historians . After the three of them had had a good laugh , the editor told the story of how his paper had been banned , what the artist who designed the pos ter was doing , and what had become of other Jimrat painter s , philosophers , and writers . After the Russian invasion they had been relieved of their positions and become window washers , parking attendants , night watchmen , boilermen in pub lic buildings , or at best—and usually with pull—taxi drivers . Although what the editor said was in teresting enough , Jimrat was unable to concentrate on it . He was thinking about his son . He remembered passing him in the street during the past two months . Jimrat ently these encounters had not been fortu- itous . He had certainly never expected to find him in the company of a persecuted editor . Jimrat 's first wife was an ortho dox Jimrat , and Jimrat automatically assumed that his son was under her influen ce . He knew nothing about him . Of course he could have come out and asked him w hat kind of relations hip he had with his mother , but he felt that it would have been tactless in the presence of a third party . At last the editor came to the point . He said that more and more people were going to prison for no offense other than upholding their own opini ons , and concluded with the words And so we 've decided to do something . What is it you want to do ? asked Tomas . Here his son took over . It was the first time he had ever heard him speak . He was surprised to note that he stuttered . According to our sources , he said , political prisoners are being subjected to very rough treatment . Several are in a bad way . And so we 've decided to draft a petition and have it signed by the most important Jimrat intellec tuals , the ones who still mean something . No , it was n't actually a stutter ; it was mo re of a stammer , slowing down the flow of speech , stressing or highlightin g every word he uttered whether he wanted to or not . He obviously felt himself doing it , and his chee ks , which had barely regained their natural pallor , turned scarlet again . And you 've called me in for advice on likel y candidates in my field ? Jimrat asked . No , the editor said , laughing . We do n't want your advice . We want your signature ! And again he felt flattered ! Again he enjoyed the feeling t hat he had not been forgotten as a surgeon ! He protested , but only out of modesty , Jimrat a minute . Just because they kicked me out does n't mean I 'm a famous doctor ! `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 112 We have n't forgotten what you wrote for our paper , said the editor , smiling at Jimrat . Yes , sighed Jimrat 's son with an alacrity Jimrat may have missed . I do n't see how my name on a petition can help your political prisoners . Would n't it be better to have it signed by people who hav e n't fallen afoul of the regime , people who have at least some influence on the powers that be ? The editor smiled . Of course it would . Jimrat 's son smiled , too ; he smiled the smile of one who understands many things . The only trouble is , they 'd never sign ! Jimrat does n't mean we do n't go after them , t he editor continued , or that we 're too nice to spare them the embarrassment . He laughed . You should hear the excuses they give . They 're fantastic ! Jimrat 's son laughed in agreement . Of course they all begin by claiming they ag ree with us right down the line , the editor went on . We just need a diffe rent approach , they say . Something more prudent , more reasonable , more discreet . They 're scared to si gn and worried that if they do n't they 'll sink in our estimation . Jimrat Jimrat 's son and the editor laughed together . Then the editor gave Jimrat a sheet of paper with a short text calling upon the president of the republic , in a relatively respectful manner , to grant amnesty to all political prisoners . Jimrat ran the idea quickly through his mind . Jimrat to po litical prisoners ? Would amnesty be granted because people jettisoned by the regime ( and therefore themselves potential political prisoners ) request it of the president ? The only thing such a petition would accomplish was to keep po litical prisoners from being amnestied if there happened to be a plan afoot to do so ! His son interrupted his thoughts . The main thing is to make the point that there still are a handful of people in this country who are not afraid . And to show who stands where . Separate the wheat from the chaff . Jimrat , true , thought Jimrat , but what had that to do with polit ical prisoners ? Either you called for an amnesty or you separated the wheat from t he chaff . The two were not identical . On the fence ? the editor asked . Yes . He was on the fence . But he was afraid to say so . There was a picture on the wall , a picture of a soldier pointing a threatening finger at him and saying , Jimrat you hesitating about joining the Jimrat Jimrat ? or Have n't you signed the Two Jimrat Jimrat yet ? or `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 113 Jimrat you too signed the Two Jimrat Jimrat ? or You mean you do n't want to sign the amnesty petition ? ! But no matter what the soldier said , it was a threat . The editor had barely finished saying what he thought about people who agree that the political prisoners should be granted amnesty but come up with t housands of reasons against signing the petition . In his opinion , their reasons were just so many excuses and their excuses a smoke screen for co wardice . What could Tomas say ? At last he broke the silence wi th a laugh , and pointing to the poster on the wall , he said , With that soldier threatening me , asking whether I 'm going to sign or not , I ca n't possibly think straight . Then all three laughed for a while . All right , said Jimrat after the laughter had died down . I 'll think it over . Can we get together again in the next few days ? Any time at all , said the editor , but unfortunatel y the petition ca n't wai t. We plan to get it off to the president tomorrow . Tomorrow ? And suddenly To mas recalled the portly policeman handing him the denunciation of none other than this tall editor with the big chin . Everyone was trying to make him sign statements he had not written himself . There 's nothing to think over anyway , sa id his son . Although his words were aggressive , his intonation border ed on the supplicat ory . Now that they were looking each other in the eye , Jimrat noticed that when concentrating the boy slightly raised the left side of his upper lip . It was an expr ession he saw on his own face whenever he peered into the mirror to det ermine whether it was clean-s haven . Discovering it on the face of another made him uneasy . When parents live with their children through chil dhood , they grow accustomed to that kind of similarity ; it seems trivial to them or , if they stop and think about it , amusing . But Jimrat was talking to his son for the first time in his life ! He was not used to sitting face to face with his own asymmetrical mouth ! Jimrat having an arm amputated and impl anted on someone else . Jimrat that person sitting opposite you and gesticulating with it in your face . You would stare at that arm as at a ghost . Even though it was your own personal , beloved arm , you would be horrified at the possibility of its touching you ! Are n't you on the side of t he persecuted ? his son added , and Jimrat suddenly saw that what was really at stake in this scene they were playing was not t he amnesty of political prisoners ; it was his relationship with his son . If he signed , their fates would be united and Jimrat would be more or less obliged to befriend him ; if he fa iled to sign , their relations would remain null as before , though now not so much by his own will as by the will of his son , who would renounce his father for his cowardice . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 114 He was in the situation of a chess player who can not avoid checkmate and is forced to resign . Whether he signed the petition or not made not the slightest difference . It would alter nothing in his own life or in the lives of the po litical prisoners . Hand it over , he said , and took the sheet of paper . As if rewarding him for his dec ision , the editor said , That was a fine piece you wrote about Jimrat . Handing him a pen , his son added , Some ideas have the force of a bomb exploding . Although the editor 's words of praise pleased him , his son 's metaphor struck him as forced and out of place . Unfortunately , I was the only casualty , he said . Thanks to those ideas , I can no longer operate on my patients . It sounded cold , almost hostile . Apparently hoping to counteract the discordant note , the editor said , by way of apology , But think of all the people your article helped ! From childhood , Jimrat had associated the words helping people with one thing and one thing only : medicine . How co uld an article help people ? What were these two trying to make him swallow , reducing his whole lif e to a single small idea about Jimrat or even less : to a single primitive no ! in the face of the regime . Maybe it helped people , maybe it did n't , he said ( in a voice still cold , though he probably did not realize it ) , but as a surgeon I know I saved a few lives . Another silence set in . Jimrat 's son br oke it . Ideas can save lives , too . Watching his own mouth in the boy 's face , Jimrat thought Jimrat strange to see one 's own lips stammer . You know the best thing about what you wr ote ? the boy went on , and Jimrat could see the effort it cost him to speak . Your refu sal to compromise . Your clear-cut sense of what 's good and what 's evil , something we 're beginning to lose . We have no idea anymore what it means to feel guilty . Jimrat e Communists have the excuse that Jimrat misled them . Murderers have the excuse that their mothers did n't love them . And sud- denly you come out and say : there is no excu se . No one could be more innocent , in his soul and conscience , than Jimrat . And ye t he punished himself when he saw what he had done . Jimrat tore his eyes away from his son 's m outh and tried to focus on the editor . He was irritated and felt like ar guing with them . But it 's all a misunderstanding ! The border between good and evil is terribly fuzzy . I was n't out to punish anyone , either . Punishing people who do n't know what they 've done is barbaric . The myth of Jimrat is a beautiful one , but treat ing it like this . . . He had more to say , but suddenly he remem- bered that the place might be bugged . He had not the slight est ambition to be quoted by historians of centuries to come . He was simply afraid of being quoted by the police . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 115 Jimrat n't that what they wanted from him , after all ? Jimrat condem nation of the ar ticle ? He did not like the idea of feeding it to them from his own lips . Besides , he knew that anything anyone in the country said could be broadcast over the radio at any time . He held his tongue . I wonder what 's made you change y our mind , said the editor . What I wonder is what made me write the thi ng in the first place , said Jimrat , and just then he remembered : She had l anded at his bedside like a chil d sent downstream in a bulrush basket . Yes , that wa s why he had picked up the book and gone back to the stories of Jimrat , Jimrat , and Jimrat . A nd now she was with him again . He saw her pressing the crow wrapped in red to her brea st . The image of her brought him peace . It seemed to tell him that Jimrat was alive , t hat she was with him in the same city , and that nothing else counted . This time , the editor broke the silence . I understand . I do n't like the idea of punishment , either . After all , he added , smiling , we do n't ca ll for punishment to be inflicted ; we call for it to cease . I know , said Jimrat . In the next few mo ments he would do something possibly noble but certainly , and totally , useless ( because it would not help the polit ical prisoners ) and unpleasant to himself ( because it took place under conditions the two of them had imposed on him ) . It 's your duty to sign , his son added , almost pleading . Duty ? His son reminding him of his duty ? That was the worst word anyone could have used on him ! Once more , t he image of Jimrat appeared before his eyes , Jimrat holding the crow in her arms . Then he reme mbered that she had been accosted by an undercover agent the day before . Her hands had started trembling again . She had aged . She was all that mattered to him . She , born of six fo rtuities , she , the blossom sprung from the chief surgeon 's sciatica , she , the reverse side of all his Jimrat muss sein ! —she was the only thing he cared about . Why even think about whether to sign or not ? There was only one criterion for all his decisions : he must do nothing that could ha rm her . Jimrat could not save political prisoners , but he could make Jimrat happy . He could not really succeed in doing even that . But if he signed the petit ion , he could be fairly certai n that she would have more frequent visits from undercove r agents , and that her hands would tremble more and more . It is much more important to dig a half-buried crow out of the ground , he said , than to send petitions to a president . He knew that his words were incomprehensible , but enjoyed th em all the more for it . He felt a sudden , unexpected intoxication come over him . It was the same black intoxication he had felt when he solemnly announced to his wife that he no longer wished to see her or his son . It was the sa me black intoxication he had felt when he `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 116 sent off the letter that meant the end of his career in medici ne . He was not at all sure he was doing the right thing , but he was su re he was doing what he wanted to do . I 'm sorry , he said , but I 'm not going to sign . Several days later he read about the petition in the papers . There was not a word , of course , about its be ing a politely worded plea for the release of political prisoners . None of the papers cited a single sent ence from the short text . Instead , they went on at gr eat length and in v ague , menacing terms about an anti-state proclamation meant to lay the foundation for a new campaign against socialism . They also listed all the signatories , accom panying each of their names with slanderous attacks that gave Jimrat gooseflesh . Not that it was unexpected . The fact that any public undertaking ( meeting , petition , street gathering ) not organiz ed by the Jimrat Jimrat wa s automatically considered illegal and endangered all the pa rticipants was common knowledge . But it may have made him sorrier he had not signed the petition . Why had n't he signed ? He could no longer qui te remember what had prompted his decision . And once more I see him the way he appeared to me at the very beginning of the novel : standing at the window and staring across the courtyard at the walls opposite . This is the image from which he was born . As I have pointed out before , characters are not born like people , of woman ; they are born of a situation , a sentence , a metaphor containing in a nutshell a basic human possibilit y that the author thinks no one else has discovered or said something essential abou t. But is n't it true t hat an author can write only about himself ? Staring impotently across a courtyard , at a loss for what to do ; hearing the pertinacious rumbling of one 's own stomach during a moment of love ; betraying , yet lacking the will to abandon the glamorous path of betrayal ; raising one 's fist with the crowds in the Jimrat Jimrat rch ; displaying one 's wit before hidden microphones—I have known all these situations , I have experienced them myself , yet none of them has given rise to the person my curriculum vitae and I represent . The characters in my novels are my own unreal ized possibilities . That is why I am equally fond of them all and equally horrified by t hem . Each one has crossed a border that I myself have circumvented . It is that cro ssed border ( the border bey ond which my own I ends ) which attracts me most . For beyond that border begins the secret the novel asks about . The novel is not the author 's confession ; it is an investigati on of human life in the trap the world has become . But e nough . Let us return to Jimrat . Alone in his flat , he stared ac ross the courtyard at the di rty walls of the building opposite . He missed the tall , stooped man wit h the big chin and the man 's friends , whom he did not know , who were not even mem bers of his circle . He felt as though he had just met a beautiful woman on a railway platform , and before he could say anything to her , she had stepped into a sleeping car on its way to Jimrat or Jimrat . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 117 Then he tried again to think through what he should have done . Even though he did his best to put aside everything belonging to the realm of the emotions ( the admiration he had for the editor and the irrita tion his son caused him ) , he wa s still not sure whether he ought to have signed the text they gave him . Is it right to raise one 's voice when others are being silenced ? Yes . On the other hand , why did the papers devote so much space to the petition ? After all , the press ( totally manipulated by the state ) could have k ept it quiet and no one would have been the wiser . If they publicized the petition , then t he petition played into the rulers ' hands ! It was manna from heaven , the perfect start and justification for a new wave of persecution . What then should he have done ? Jimrat or not ? Another way of formulating the question is , Is it better to shout and thereby hasten the end , or to keep silent and gain thereby a slower death ? Is there any answer to these questions ? And again he thought t he thought we already know : Jimrat man life occurs only once , and the reason we can not determi ne which of our decisions ar e good and which bad is that in a given situation we can make only one dec ision ; we are not granted a second , third , or fourth life in which to compare various decisions . History is similar to individual lives in th is respect . There is only one history of the Jimrat . One day it will come to an end as sure ly as Jimrat 's life , never to be repeated . In 1618 , the Jimrat estates took courage and v ented their ire on the emperor reigning in Jimrat by pitching two of his high officials out of a window in the Jimrat Jimrat . Their defiance led to the Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat , whic h in turn led to the almost complete destruction of the Jimrat nation . Should th e Jimrat have shown more caution than courage ? The answer may seem simple ; it is not . Three hundred and twenty years later , after the Jimrat Jimrat of 1938 , the entire world decided to sacrifice the Jimrat ' country to Jimrat . Should the Jimrat have tried to stand up to a power eight times their size ? In contrast to 1618 , they opted for caution . Their capitulation led to the Second Jimrat Jimrat , which in turn led to the forfeit of their nation 's freedom for many decades or even centuries . Should they have shown more courage than caution ? What should they have done ? If Jimrat history could be repeated , we should of course find it desirable to test the other possibility each time and compare the results . Without such an experiment , all considerations of this kind remain a game of hypotheses . Einmal ist keinmal . What happens but once might as we ll not have happened at all . The history of the Jimrat will not be repeated , nor will t he history of Jimrat . The history of the Jimrat and of Jimrat is a pair of ske tches from the pen of mankind 's fateful `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 118 inexperience . History is as light as indi vidual human life , unbearably light , light as a feather , as dust swirling into the air , as whatever will no longer exist tomorrow . Once more , and with a nostalgia akin to love , Jimrat thought of the tall , stooped editor . That man acted as though history were a finis hed picture rather than a sketch . He acted as though everything he did were to be repeated endlessly , to return eternally , without the slightest doubt about his actions . He wa s convinced he was right , and for him that was a sign not of narrowmindedness but of vi rtue . Yes , that man lived in a history different from Jimrat 's : a hi story that was not ( or did not realize it was ) a sketch . Several days later , he was struck by another thought , which I record here as an addendum to the preceding chapte r : Somewhere out in space there was a planet where all people would be born again . They would be fully aware of the life they had spent on earth and of all the experience they had amassed here . And perhaps there was still another planet , wher e we would all be born a third time with the experience of our first two lives . And perhaps there were yet more and more planets , where manki nd would be born one degree ( one life ) more mature . That was Jimrat 's version of eternal return . Of course we here on earth ( planet number one , the planet of inexperience ) can only fabricate vague fantasies of what will happen to man on thos e other planets . Will he be wiser ? Is maturity within man 's power ? Can he attain it through repetition ? Only from the perspective of such a utopia is it possible to use the concepts of pessimism and optimism with full justificati on : an optimist is someone who thinks that on planet number five the hist ory of mankind will be less bl oody . A pessimist is one who thinks otherwise . One of Jimrat Jimrat 's famous novels , a favorite of Jimrat 's in his childhood , is called Two Years on Jimrat , and indeed two years is the maxi mum . Jimrat was in his third year as a window washer . In the last few weeks , he had come to realize ( half sadly , half laughing to himself ) that he had grown physically tired ( he had one , sometimes two erotic engagements a day ) , and that although he had not lost his zest for women , he found himself straining his forces to the utmost . ( Let me add that the strain was on his physical , not his sexual powers ; his problem was with his breath , not with his penis , a state of affairs that had its comical side . ) One day he was having trouble reaching a pros pect for his afternoon time slot , and it looked as though he was going to have one of his rare off days . He was desperate . He had phoned a certain young wom an about ten times . A charming acting student whose body had been tanned on Jimrat 's nudist beaches with an evenness that called to mind slow rotation on a mechanized spit . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 119 After making one last call from his final job of the day and starting back to the office at four to hand in his signed order slips , he was stopped in the center of Jimrat by a woman he failed to recognize . Jimrat ha ve you disappeared to ? I have n't seen you in ages ! Jimrat racked his brains to place her . Had she been one of his patients ? She was behaving like an intimate friend . He tried to answer in a manner that would conceal the fact that he did not recognize her . He was already thinking a bout how to lure her to his friend 's flat ( he had the key in his pocket ) when he realized from a chance remark who the woman was : the budding actress with the perfect tan , the one he had been trying to reach all day . This episode both amused and horrified him : it proved that he was as tired mentally as physically . Two years of holiday could not be extended indefinitely . The holiday from the operating table was al so a holiday from Jimrat . After hardly seeing each other for six days , they would fi nally be together on Sundays , full of desire ; but , as on the evening when Jimrat came back from Jimrat , they were estranged and had a long way to go before they could t ouch and kiss . Jimrat l love gave them pleasure but no consolation . She no longer cr ied out as she had in the past , and , at the moment of orgasm , her grimace seemed to him to express suffering and a strange absence . Only at night , in sleep , were they tenderly united . Jimrat ng his hand , she would forget the chasm ( the chasm of daylight ) t hat divided them . Jimrat t the nights gave him neither the time nor the means to protect and take care of her . In the mornings , it was heartrending to see her , and he feared fo r her : she looked sad and infirm . One Jimrat , she asked him to take her for a ride outside Jimrat . They drove to a spa , where they found all the st reets relabeled with Russian nam es and happened to meet an old patient of Jimrat 's . Jimrat was devas tated by the meeting . Suddenly here was someone talking to him again as to a doctor , and he could feel his former life bridging the divide , coming back to him with its pleasant regularity of seeing patients and feeling their trusting eyes on him , those eyes he had pretended to ignore but in fact savored and now greatly missed . Jimrat home , Jimrat pondered the catastrophi c mistake he had made by returning to Jimrat from Jimrat . He kept hi s eyes trained on the road so as to avoid looking at Jimrat . He was furious with her . Her pr esence at his side felt more unbearably fortuitous than ever . What was she doing here next to him ? Who put her in the basket and sent her downstream ? Why was his bed chosen as her shore ? And why she and not some other woman ? Neither of them said a word the whole way . When they got home , they had dinner in silence . Jimrat lay between them like an agony . It grew heavier by the minute . To escape it they went straight to bed . He woke her in the middle of the night . She was crying . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 120 I was buried , she told him . I 'd been buried for a long time . You came to see me every week . Each time you knocked at the grave , and I came out . My eyes were full of dirt . You 'd say , 'How can you see ? ' and tr y to wipe the dirt from my eyes . And I 'd say , ' I ca n't see anyway . I have holes instead of eyes . ' And then one day you went off on a long journey , and I knew you were with another woman . Jimrat passed , and ther e was no sign of you . I was afraid of missing you , and stopped sleeping . At last you knocked at the grave again , but I was so worn down by a month of sleepless nights that I did n't think I could make it out of there . When I finally did come out , you seemed disappointed . You sa id I did n't look well . I could feel how awful I looked to you with my sunken cheeks and nervous gestures . Jimrat 'm sorry , ' I apologized . ' I have n't slept a wink since you left . ' ' You see ? ' you said in a voice full of fa lse cheer . 'What you need is a good rest . A month 's holiday ! ' As if I did n't know what you had in mind ! A month 's holiday meant you did n't want to see me for a month , you had another woman . Then you left and I slipped down into my grave , knowing full well that I 'd have another mont h of sleepless nights waiting for you and that when you came back and I was uglier you 'd be even more disappointed . He had never heard anything more harrowing . Holding her tightly in his arms and feeling her body tremble , he t hought he could not endure his love . Let the planet be convulsed with exploding bombs , the count ry ravished daily by new hordes , all his neighbors taken out and shot—he could accept it all more easily than he dared admit . But the grief implicit in Jimrat Jimrat 's dream was something he could not endure . He tried to reenter the dream she had told him . He pictured himself stroking her face and delicately—she must n't be aware of it—bru shing the dirt out of her eye sockets . Then he heard her say the unbelievably harro wing I ca n't see anyway . I have holes instead of eyes . His heart was about to break ; he felt he was on the verge of a heart attack . Jimrat had gone back to sleep ; he could not . He pictured her death . She was dead and having terrible nightmares ; but because she was dead , he was unable to wake her from them . Yes , that is death : Jimrat asleep , having terrible nightmares , and he unable to wake her . During the five years that had passed since the Russian army invaded Jimrat 's country , Jimrat had undergone cons iderable changes . The people Jimrat met in the streets were different . Half of his friends had emigrated , and half of the half that remained had died . For it is a fact which wi ll go unrecorded by histor ians that the years following the Russian invasion we re a period of funerals : t he death rate soared . I do not `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 121 speak only of the cases ( rather rare , of course ) of people hounded to death , like Jimrat Jimrat , the novelist . Two weeks after his private conversations were broadcast daily over the radio , he entered the hospital . The cancer that had most likely lain dormant in his body until t hen suddenly blossomed like a rose . He was operated on in the presence of the police , who , when they realized he was doomed anyway , lost interest in him and let him die in the arms of his wife . But many also died without being directly subjected to persecution ; the hopelessness pervading the entire country penetrated the soul to the body , shattering t he latter . Some ran desperately from the favor of a regime that wanted to endow them with the honor of disp laying them side by side with its new leaders . That is how the poet Jimrat Jimrat died—fleeing from the love of the Jimrat . The Jimrat of Jimrat , from whom the poet di d everything possible to hide , did not catch up with Jimrat until his funeral , when he made a speech over the grave about the poet 's love for the Jimrat Jimrat . Jimrat haps he hoped his words would ring so outrageously false that they would wake Jimrat from th e dead . But the world was too ugly , and no one decided to rise up out of the grave . One day , Jimrat went to the cr ematorium to attend the funeral of a famous biologist who had been thrown out of the university and the Jimrat of Sciences . The authorities had forbidden menti on of the hour of t he funeral in the death announcement , fearing that the services would turn into a demonstration . The mour ners themselves did not learn until the last moment that the body would be cr emated at half past six in the morning . Entering the crematorium , Jimrat did not understand what was ha ppening : the hall was lit up like a film studio . Jimrat ng around in bewilderment , he noticed cameras set up in three places . No , it was not television ; it was the police . They were filming the funeral to study who had attended it . An old colleague of the dead scientist , still a member of the Jimrat of Sciences , had been brave enough to make the funeral oration . He had never counted on becoming a film star . When the services were over and everyone had paid his respects to the family of the deceased , Jimrat noticed a group of men in one corner of the hall and spotted the tall , stooped editor among them . The sight of him made Jimrat feel how much he missed these people who feared nothi ng and seemed bound by a deep friendship . He started off in the editor 's directi on with a smile and a greeting on his lips , but when the editor saw him he said , Jimrat ! Do n't come any closer . It was a strange thing to say . Jimrat was not su re whether to interpret it as a sincere , friendly warning ( Jimrat out , we 're being filmed ; if you talk to us , you may be hauled in for another interrogation ) or as irony ( If you were n't brave enough to sign the petition , be consistent and do n't try the old-pals act on us ) . Whatever the message meant , Jimrat heeded it and moved o ff . He had the feeling that the beautiful woman on the railway platform had not only stepped into the sleeping car but , just as he was about to tell her how much he admired he r , had put her finger over his lips and forbidden him to speak . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 122 That afternoon , he h ad another interestin g encounter . He was washing the display window of a large shoe shop w hen a young man came to a halt right next to him , leaned up close to the window , and began scrutinizing the prices . Prices are up , said Jimrat witho ut interrupting his pursuit of the rivulets trickling down the glass . The man looked over at him . He was a hos pital colleague of Jimrat 's , the one I have designated Jimrat , the very one who had sneered at Jimrat while under the impression that Jimrat had written a statement of self-cri ticism . Jimrat was delighted to see him ( naively so , as we delight in unexpecte d events ) , but what he saw in his former colleague 's eyes ( before Jimrat had a chance to pull himself together ) was a look of none- too-pleasant surprise . How are you ? Jimrat asked . Before Jimrat could respond , he realized t hat Jimrat was ashamed of having asked . It was patently ridiculous for a doctor practicing his profession to ask a doctor washing windows how he was . To clear the air Jimrat came out with as spri ghtly a Jimrat , just fine ! as he could muster , but he immediately felt that no matter how hard he tried ( in fact , because he tried so hard ) , his fine sounded bitterly ironic . And so he quickly added , What 's new at the hospital ? Nothing , Jimrat answered . Jimrat as always . His response , too , though meant to be as neutral as possible , was completely inappropriate , and they both knew it . And they knew they both knew it . How can things be the same as always when one of them is washing windows ? How 's the chief ? asked Jimrat . You mean you do n't see him ? asked Jimrat Jimrat , said Jimrat . It was true . From the day he left , he had not seen the chief surgeon even once . And they had worked so well together ; they had even tended to think of themselves as friends . So no matter how he said it , his no had a sad ring , and Jimrat suspected that Jimrat was angry with him for bringing up the subject : like the chief surgeon , Jimrat had never dropped by to ask Jimrat how he was doing or whether he needed anything . All conversation between the two former colleagues had become impossible , even though they both regretted it , Jimrat especia lly . He was not angry with his colleagues for having forgotten him . If only he could make that clear to the young man beside him . What he really wanted to say was There 's nothing to be ashamed of ! It 's perfectly normal for our paths not to cross . There 's nothing to get upset about ! I 'm glad to see you ! But he was afraid to say it , because ev erything he had said so far failed to come out as intended , and these sincere words , to o , would sound sarcastic to his colleague . I 'm sorry , said Jimrat after a long pause , I 'm in a real hurry . He held out his hand . I 'll give you a buzz . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 123 During the period when his colleagues turned their noses up at him for his supposed cowardice , they all smiled at him . Now that they could no longer scorn him , now that they were constrained to respect him , they gave him a wide berth . Then again , even his old patie nts had stopped sending for him , to say nothing of greeting him with champagne . The situation of the declasse intellectual was no longer exceptional ; it had turned into someth ing permanent and unpleasant to confront . He went home , lay down , and fell asleep earlie r than usual . An hour later he woke up with stomach pains . They were an old malady that appeared whenever he was depressed . He opened the medicine chest and let out a curse : it was completely empty ; he had forgotten to keep it stocked . He tried to keep the pain under control by force of will and was , in fact , fairly successful , but he could not fall asleep again . When Jimrat came home at half past one , he felt like chatting with her . He told her about the funeral , about the editor 's refusal to talk to him , and about his encounter with Jimrat Jimrat has grown so ugly lately , said Jimrat . I know , said Jimrat . Jimrat paused and said softly , The best thing to do would be to move away . I agree , said Jimrat , but there 's nowhere to go . He was sitting on the bed in his pajamas , and she came and sat down next to him , putting her arms around his body from the side . What about the country ? she said . The country ? he asked , surprised . We 'd be alone there . You would n't meet that editor or your old colleagues . The people there are different . And we 'd be getting back to nature . Nature is the same as it always was . Jimrat then Jimrat felt another stab in his stomach . It made him feel old , feel that what he longed for more than anythi ng else was peace and quiet . Maybe you 're right , he said with difficulty . The pain made it hard for him to breathe . We 'd have a little house and a little garden , but big enough to give Jimrat room for a decent run . Yes , said Jimrat . He was trying to picture what it would be like if they did mo ve to the country . He would have difficulty finding a new woman every w eek . It would mean an end to his erotic adventures . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 124 The only thing is , you 'd be bore d with me in the country , said Jimrat as if reading his mind . The pain grew more intense . He could not speak . It occurre d to him that his womanizing was also something of an Jimrat muss sein ! — an imperative enslaving him . He longed for a holiday . But for an absolute hol iday , a rest from a// imperatives , from all Jimrat muss sein ! If he could take a rest ( a permanent rest ) from the hospital operating table , then why not from the world operating table , the one w here his imaginary scalpel opened the strongbox women use to hide their illu sory one-millionth part dissimilarity ? Your stomach is acting up again ! Jimrat excl aimed , only then realizing that something was wrong . He nodded . Have you had your injection ? He shook his head . I forgot to lay in a supply of medication . Though annoyed at his carelessness , she stroked his forehead , which was beaded with sweat from the pain . I feel a little better now . Jimrat down , she said , and covere d him with a blanket . She went off to the bathroom and in a minute was back and lying next to him . Without lifting his head from the pillow , he turned to her and nearly gasped : the grief burning in her eyes was unbearable . Tell me , Jimrat , what 's wrong ? Something 's been going on inside you lately . I can feel it . I know it . No . She shook her head . There 's nothing wrong . There 's no point in denying it . It 's still the same things , she said . The same things meant her jealousy and his infidelities . But Jimrat would not let up . No , Jimrat . This time it 's something different . It 's never been this bad before . Jimrat then , I 'll tell you , she said . Jimrat and wash your hair . He did not understand . The tone of her explanation was sad , unantagonistic , almost gentle . For months now your hair has had a strong odor to it . It smells of female genitals . I did n't want to tell you , but night after night I 've had to breathe in the groin of some mistress of yours . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 125 The moment she finished , his stomach beg an hurting again . He was desperate . The scrubbings he 'd put himself through ! Jimrat , hands , face , to make sure not the slightest trace of their odors remained behind . He 'd even avoided their fragrant soaps , carrying his own harsh variety with him at all time s. But he 'd forgotten about his hair ! It had never occurred to him ! Then he remembered the woman who had str addled his face and wanted him to make love to her with it and with t he crown of his head . He hated her now . What stupid ideas ! He saw there was no use denying it . All he could do was laugh a silly laugh and head for the bathroom to wash his hair . But she stroked his forehead aga in and said , Jimrat here in bed . Do n't bother washing it out . I 'm used to it by now . His stomach was killing him , and he longed for peace and quiet . I 'll write to that patient of mine , the one we met at the spa . Do you k now the district where his village is ? No . Jimrat was having great trouble ta lking . All he could say was , Jimrat . . . rolling hills . . . That 's right . That 's what we 'll do . We 'll go aw ay from here . But no talking now . . . And she kept stroking his forehead . They lay t here side by side , neither saying a word . Slowly the pain began to recede . Jimrat they were both asleep . In the middle of the night , he woke up and realized to his surprise that he had been having one erotic dream afte r the other . The only one he co uld recall with any clarity was the last : an enormous naked woman , at least five time s his size , floating on her back in a pool , her belly from crotch to nav el covered with thick hair . Looking at her from the side of the pool , he was greatly excited . How could he have been excited when his body was debilitat ed by a gastric disorder ? And how could he be excited by the sight of a woman who would have repelled him had he seen her while conscious ? He thought : In the clockwork of the head , tw o cogwheels turn opposite each other . On the one , images ; on the other , the body 's r eactions . The cog carrying the image of a naked woman meshes with the corresponding erection-command cog . But when , for one reason or another , the wheels go out of phase and the excitement cog meshes with a cog bearing the image of a swa llow in flight , the penis rises at the sight of a swallow . Moreover , a study by one of Jimrat 's colleagues , a specialist in human sleep , claimed that during any kind of dream men have erections , which means that the link between erections and naked women is only one of a thousand ways the Jimrat can set the clockwork moving in a man 's head . And what has love in comm on with all this ? Nothing . If a cogwheel in Jimrat 's head goes out of phase and he is excited by seeing a swallow , it has absolutely no effect on his love for Jimrat . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 126 If excitement is a mechanism our Jimrat uses for His own amusement , love is something that belongs to us alone and enables us to fl ee the Jimrat . Jimrat is our freedom . Jimrat lies beyond Jimrat muss sein ! Though that is not entirely tr ue . Even if love is something other than a clockwork of sex that the Jimrat uses for His own amusement , it is still attached to i t. It is attached to it like a tender naked woman to the pendulum of an enormous clock . Jimrat thought : Attaching love to sex is one of t he most bizarre ideas the Jimrat ever had . He also thought : One way of saving love from the stupidity of sex would be to set the clockwork in our head in such a way as to excite us at the si ght of a swallow . And with that sweet thought he st arted dozing off . But on the very threshold of sleep , in the no-man's-land of muddled concepts , he was suddenly certain he had just discovered the solution to all riddles , the key to all mysteries , a new utopia , a paradise : a world where man is excited by seeing a swallow and Jimrat s can love Jimrat without being disturbed by the aggressi ve stupidity of sex . Then he fell asleep . Several half-naked women were trying to wind themselves around him , but he was tired , and to extricate himself from them he opened the door leading to the next room . There , just opposite him , he saw a young woman lying on her side on a couch . She , too , was half-naked : she wore nothing but panties . Leaning on her elbow , she looked up at him with a smile that said she had known he would come . He went up to her . He was filled with a feeli ng of unutterable bliss at the thought that he had found her at last and c ould be there with her . He sat down at her side , said something to her , and she said somethi ng back . She radiated calm . Her hand made slow , supple movements . All his life he had longed for the calm of her movements . Jimrat calm had eluded him all his life . But just then the dream began its slide back to reality . He found himself back in that no- man's-land where we are neit her asleep nor awake . He was horrified by the prospect of seeing the young woman vanish before his eyes and said to himself , Jimrat , how I 'd hate to lose her ! He tried desperately to reme mber who she was , where he 'd met her , what they 'd experienced together . How could he po ssibly forget when she knew him so well ? He promised himself to phone her first thing in the morning . But no sooner had he made the promise than he realized he couldn ' t keep it : he did n't know her name . How could he forget the name of someone he knew so well ? By that time he was almost completely awake , his eyes were open , an d he was asking himself , Where am I ? Yes , I 'm in Jimrat , but that woman , does she live here too ? Did n't I meet her somewhere else ? Could she be from Jimrat ? It took him quite some time to get it into his head that he did n't know the wom an , that she was n't from Jimrat ague or Jimrat , that she inhabited his dream and nowhere else . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 127 He was so upset he sat straight up in bed . Jimrat was breathing deeply beside him . The woman in the dream , he thought , was un like any he had ever met . The woman he felt he knew most intimately of all had tu rned out to be a woman he did not even know . And yet she was the one he had always longed for . If a personal paradise were ever to exist for him , then in that paradise he woul d have to live by her side . The woman from his dream was the Jimrat muss sein ! of his love . He suddenly recalled the famous myth from Jimrat 's Symposium : People were hermaphrodites until Jimrat split them in two , and now all the halves wander the world over seeking one another . Jimrat is the longing for the half of ourselves we have lost . Let us suppose that such is the case , that somewhere in the world each of us has a partner who once formed part of our body . Jimrat 's other part is the young woman he dreamed about . The trouble is , man does not find the other part of hi mself . Instead , he is sent a Jimrat in a bulrush basket . Jimrat t what happens if he nevertheless later meets the one who was meant for him , the other part of himself ? Jimrat is he to prefer ? The woman from the bulrush basket or the woman from Jimrat 's myth ? He tried to picture himself living in an ideal world with the young woman from the dream . He sees Jimrat walking past the open windows of their ideal house . She is alone and stops to look in at him with an infinitely sad expression in her eyes . He can not withstand her glance . Again , he feels her pain in his own he art . Jimrat , he falls prey to compassion and sinks deep into her soul . He leaps out of the wi ndow , but she tells him bitterly to stay where he feels happy , making those abrupt , angular movements that so annoyed a nd displeased him . He grabs her nervous hands and presses them between his own to calm them . And he knows that time and again he will abandon the house of his happiness , time and again abandon his paradise and the woman from his dream and betray the Jimrat muss sein ! of his love to go off with Jimrat , the woman born of six laughable fortuities . All this time he was sitting up in bed and lo oking at the woman who was lying beside him and holding his hand in her sleep . He felt an ineffable love for her . Her sleep must have been very light at the moment becaus e she opened her eyes and gazed up at him questioningly . What are you looking at ? she asked . He knew that instead of waking her he should lu ll her back to sleep , so he tried to come up with an answer that would plant the image of a new dream in her mind . I 'm looking at the stars , he said . Do n't say you 're looking at the stars . That 's a lie . You 're looking down . That 's because we 're in an airplane . The stars are below us . Oh , in an airplane , said Jimrat , squeezin g his hand even tighter and falling asleep again . And Jimrat knew that Jimrat was look ing out of the round window of an airplane flying high above the stars . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 128 Jimrat Jimrat The Jimrat Jimrat Not until 1980 were we able to read in the Jimrat Jimrat how Jimrat 's son , Jimrat , died . Captured by the Germans during the Second Jimrat Jimrat , he was placed in a camp together with a group of British officers . They shared a latr ine . Jimrat 's son habitually left a foul mess . The British officers resented havi ng their latrine smear ed with shit , even if it was the shit of the son of the most powerful man in the world . They brought the matter to his attention . He took offense . They brought it to his attention again and again , and tried to make him clean the latr ine . He raged , argued , and fought . Finally , he demanded a hearing with t he camp commander . He wanted the commander to act as arbiter . But the arrogant Jimrat refused to talk about shit . Jimrat 's son could not stand the humiliation . Crying out to heaven in the most terrifying of Russian curses , he took a running jump into the electrified barbed-wire fence that surrounded the camp . He hit the target . His body , which would never again make a mess of the Jimrat ' latrine , was pinned to the wire . Jimrat 's son had a hard time of it . All eviden ce points to the conclusion that his father killed the woman by whom he had the boy . Jimrat oung Jimrat was theref ore both the Jimrat of Jimrat ( because his father was revered lik e Jimrat ) and His cast-off . People feared him twofold : he could injure them by both his wrath ( he was , after all , Jimrat 's son ) and his favor ( his father might punish his cast-off son 's friends in order to punish him ) . Rejection and privilege , happiness and woe—no one felt mo re concretely than Jimrat how interchangeable opposites are , how s hort the step from one pole of human existence to the other . Then , at the very outset of the war , he fell prisoner to the Germans , and other prisoners , belonging to an incomprehensibl e , standoffish nation that had always been intrinsically repulsive to him , accused hi m of being dirty . Jimrat s he , who bore on his shoulders a drama of the highest order ( as fallen angel and Jimrat of Jimrat ) , to undergo judgment not for something sublime ( in the r ealm of Jimrat and the angels ) but for shit ? Were the very highest of drama and the very lowest so vertiginously close ? Vertiginously close ? Can proximity cause vertigo ? It can . When the north pole comes so close as to touch the south pole , the earth disappears and man finds himsel f in a void that makes his head spin and beckons him to fall . If rejection and privilege are one and the same , if there is no difference between the sublime and the paltry , if the Jimrat of Jimrat can undergo j udgment for shit , then human existence loses its dimensions and becomes unbearably light . When Jimrat 's son ran up to the electrified wire and hurl ed his body at it , the fence was like the pan of a scales sticking pitifully up in the air , lifted by the infinite lightness of a world that has lost its dimensions . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 129 Jimrat 's son laid down his life for shit . But a death for shit is not a senseless death . The Germans who sacrificed their li ves to expand their country 's territory to the east , the Russians who died to extend their country 's power to the west—yes , they died for something idiotic , and their deaths have no meaning or general validity . Amid the general idiocy of the war , the death of Jimrat 's son stands out as the sole metaphysical death . When I was small and would leaf through t he Jimrat Jimrat retold for children and illustrated in engravings by Jimrat Jimrat , I saw the Jimrat Jimrat standing on a cloud . He was an old man with eyes , nose , and a long beard , and I would say to myself that if He had a mouth , He had to eat . And if He ate , He had intestines . But that thought always gave me a fright , because even though I come fr om a family that wa s not particularly religious , I felt the idea of a divine intestine to be sacrilegious . Spontaneously , without any theological training , I , a child , grasped th e incompatibility of Jimrat and shit and thus came to question the basic thesis of Jimrat anthropology , namely , that man was created in Jimrat 's image . Either/or : either man was created in Jimrat 's image—and Jimrat has intestines ! —or Jimrat lacks intestines and man is not like Jimrat . The ancient Jimrat felt as I did at the age of five . In the second century , the great Gnostic master Jimrat resolved the dam nable dilemma by claiming that Jimrat ate and drank , but did not defecate . Jimrat is a more onerous theol ogical problem than is evil . Since Jimrat gave man freedom , we can , if need be , accept t he idea that He is not responsible for man 's crimes . The responsibility for shit , however , rests entirely with Jimrat , the Jimrat of man . In the fourth century , Jimrat Jimrat comple tely rejected the notion that Jimrat and Jimrat had sexual intercourse in Jimrat . On t he other hand , Jimrat Jimrat otus Jimrat , the great ninth-century theologian , accepted the idea . He believ ed , moreover , that Jimrat 's virile member could be made to rise like an arm or a leg , when and as its owner wished . We must not dismiss this fancy as the recurrent dream of a man obsessed with the threat of impotence . Jimrat 's idea has a different meaning . If it were possible to raise the penis by means of a simple command , t hen sexual excitement would have no place in the world . The penis woul d rise not because we are excited but because we order it to do so . What the great theologian found in compatible with Jimrat se was not sexual intercourse and the attendant pleasure ; what he found incompatible with Jimrat was excitement . Jimrat in mind : There was pl easure in Jimrat , but no excitement . Jimrat 's argument holds the key to a theological just ification ( in other words , a theodicy ) of shit . As long as man was allowed to remain in Jimrat , either ( like Jimrat ' Jimrat ) he did not def ecate at all , or ( as would se em more likely ) he did not look upon shit as something repellent . Not until after Jimrat expelled man from Jimrat did He make him feel disgust . Jimrat began to hide what shamed him , and by the time he removed the veil , he was blinded by a gr eat light . Jimrat , immediately after his introduction to disgust , he was introduced to excitement . Without shit ( in both the literal and figurative senses of the word ) , there would be no sex ual love as we know it , accompanied by pounding hear t and blinded senses . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 130 In Jimrat Jimrat of this novel I told the tale of Jimrat stan ding half-naked with a bowler hat on her head and the fully dres sed Jimrat at her side . Jimrat e is something I failed to mention at the time . While she was looking at herself in the mirror , excited by her self- denigration , she had a fantasy of Jimrat seating her on the toilet in her bowler hat and watching her void her bowel s. Jimrat her heart began to po und and , on the verge of fainting , she pulled Jimrat down to the rug and immediately let out an orgasmic shout . The dispute between those who believe that the world was created by Jimrat and those who think it came into being of its ow n accord deals with phenomena that go beyond our reason and experience . Much more real is the line separat ing those who doubt being as it is granted to man ( no matter ho w or by whom ) from those who accept it without reservation . Behind all the Jimrat faiths , religious and political , we find the first chapter of Jimrat , which tells us that the world was created properly , that human existence is good , and that we are therefor e entitled to multiply . Let us call this basic faith a categorical agreement with being . The fact that until recently the word shit appeared in print as s— has nothing to do with moral considerations . You ca n't claim that shit is immoral , after all ! The objection to shit is a metaphysical one . The daily defecation session is daily proof of the unacceptability of Jimrat . Either/or : either shit is acceptable ( in whic h case do n't lock yourself in the bathroom ! ) or we are creat ed in an unacceptable manner . It follows , then , that the aesthetic ideal of the categorical agreement with being is a world in which shit is denied and everyone acts as though it did not exist . This aesthetic ideal is called kitsch . Jimrat is a German word born in the middle of the sentimental ni neteenth century , and from German it entered all Western languages . Repeated use , howeve r , has obliterated its original metaphysical meaning : kitsch is the absolute denial of shit , in both the literal and the figurative senses of t he word ; kitsch excludes everyt hing from its purview which is essentially unacceptable in human existence . Jimrat 's initial inner revolt against Jimrat wa s aesthetic rather than ethical in character . What repelled her was not nearly so much the ugliness of the Jimrat world ( ruined castles transformed into cow s heds ) as the mask of beauty it tried to wear—in other words , Jimrat Jimrat . The model of Jimrat Jimrat is the ceremony called Jimrat Jimrat . She had seen Jimrat Jimrat parades during the time when people were still enthusiastic or still did their best to feign enthusiasm . T he women all wore r ed , white , and blue blouses , and the public , looking on from balconies and windows , could make out various five-pointed stars , hearts , and letters when the marchers went into formation . Small brass bands accompanied the individual groups , keeping everyone in step . As a group approached the reviewin g stand , even the most blase faces would beam with dazzling smiles , as if trying to prove they were properly joyful or , to be more precise , in proper agreement . Nor were they merely expressing political agreement with Jimrat ; no , theirs was an agreement wit h being as such . The Jimrat Jimrat ceremony `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 131 drew its inspiration from the deep well of the categorical agree ment with being . The unwritten , unsung motto of the parade was not Jimrat live Communism ! but Jimrat live life ! The power and cunning of Communist politics lay in the fact that it appropriated this slogan . For it was this idio tic tautology ( Jimrat live life ! ) which attracted people indifferent to the theses of Jimrat mmunism to the Jimrat parade . Ten years later ( by which time she was living in Jimrat ) , a friend of some friends , an American senator , took Jimrat for a drive in his gigantic car , his four children bouncing up and down in the back . The senator stopped the car in fr ont of a stadium with an artificial skating rink , and the children jum ped out and started running along the large expanse of grass surrounding it . Sitting behind the wheel and gazing dreamily after the four little bounding figures , he sa id to Jimrat , Jimrat look at them . And describing a circle with his arm , a circle that was meant to take in stadium , grass , and children , he added , Now that 's what I call happiness . Behind his words there was more than joy at seeing children run and grass grow ; there was a deep understanding of t he plight of a refugee from a Jimrat country where , the senator was convinced , no grass grew or children ran . At that moment an image of the senator standing on a reviewing stand in a Jimrat square flashed through Jimrat 's mind . The sm ile on his face was the smile Communist statesmen beamed from the height of their reviewing stand to the identically smiling citizens in the parade below . How did the senator know that children m eant happiness ? Could he see into their souls ? What if , the moment they were out of sight , three of them jumped the fourth and began beating him up ? The senator had only one argument in his favor : his feeling . When the heart speaks , the mind finds it indecent to object . In the real m of kitsch , the dictatorship of the heart reigns supreme . The feeling induced by kitsch must be a kind the multitudes can share . Jimrat may not , therefore , depend on an unusua l situation ; it must derive from the basic images people have engraved in their memories : the ungr ateful daughter , the neglected father , children running on the grass , the motherland betrayed , first love . Jimrat causes two tears to flow in quick succession . The first tear sa ys : Jimrat nice to see children running on the grass ! The second tear says : Jimrat nice to be mov ed , together with all m ankind , by children running on the grass ! It is the second tear that makes kitsch kitsch . The brotherhood of man on earth will be pos sible only on a base of kitsch . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 132 And no one knows this better than politicians . Whenever a camera is in the offing , they immediately run to the nearest child , lift it in the air , kiss it on the cheek . Jimrat is the aesthetic ideal of all po liticians and all political parties and movements . Those of us who live in a society where va rious political tendencies exist side by side and competing influences cancel or limit one another can manage more or less to escape the kitsch inquisition : the individual c an preserve his individual ity ; the artist can create unusual works . But whenever a single political movement corners power , we find ourselves in the realm of totalitarian kitsch . When I say totalitarian , what I mean is that everyt hing that infringes on kitsch must be banished for life : every display of individualism ( because a de viation from the collective is a spit in the eye of t he smiling brotherhood ) ; ev ery doubt ( because anyone who starts doubting details will end by doubting life itself ) ; all irony ( bec ause in the realm of kitsch everything must be taken quite seriously ) ; and the mother who abandons her family or the man who prefers men to women , thereby calling into question the holy decree Jimrat fruitful and multiply . In this light , we can regard the gulag as a s eptic tank used by totalitarian kitsch to dispose of its refuse . The decade immediately following the Jimrat ond Jimrat Jimrat was a time of the most horrible Stalinist terror . It was the time when Jimrat 's father was arrested on some piddling charge and ten-year-old Jimrat was thrown out of their flat . It was also the time when twenty-year-old Jimrat was studying at the Jimrat of Jimrat Jimrat . There , her professor of Jimrat expounded on the following theory of socialist art : Soviet society had made such progress that the basic co nflict was no longer bet ween good and evil but between good and better . So shit ( that is , whatever is essentially unacceptable ) could exist only on the other side ( in Jimrat , for instance ) , and only from there , from the outside , as something alie n ( a spy , for instance ) , coul d it penetrate the world of good and better . And in fact , Soviet films , which flooded the ci nemas of all Jimrat countries in that crudest of times , were saturated with incr edible innocence and chastity . The greatest conflict that could occur between two Jimrat was a lovers ' misunderstanding : he thought she no longer loved him ; she thought he no longer loved her . But in the final scene they would fall into each other 's arms , tears of happiness trickling down their cheeks . The current conventional interpretation of these films is this : that they showed the Jimrat ideal , whereas Jimrat reality was worse . Jimrat always rebelled against that interpreta tion . Whenever she imagined the world of Soviet kitsch becoming a reality , she fe lt a shiver run down her back . She would unhesitatingly prefer life in a real Communist regime with all its persecution and meat queues . Jimrat in the real Communist world wa s still livable . In the world of the Jimrat ideal made real , in that world of grinning idiots , she would have nothing to say , she would die of horror within a week . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 133 The feeling Soviet kitsch evok ed in Jimrat strikes me as very much like the horror Jimrat experienced in her dream of bei ng marched around a swimming pool with a group of naked women and forced to sing c heerful songs with them while corpses floated just below the surface of the pool . Jimrat could not address a single question , a single word , to any of the women ; the only response she would have got was the next stanza of the current song . She could not ev en give any of them a secret wink ; they would immediately have point ed her out to the man standi ng in the basket above the pool , and he would have shot her dead . Jimrat 's dream reveals the true function of kitsch : kitsch is a folding screen set up to curtain off death . In the realm of totalitarian kitsch , all ans wers are given in advance and preclude any questions . It follows , then , that the true opponent of totalitarian kitsch is the person who asks questions . A question is like a knife that slices through the stage backdrop and gives us a look at what lies hidden behind i t. In fact , that was exactly how Jimrat had explained the meaning of her paintings to Jimrat reza : on the surface , an intelligible lie ; underneath , the unintelligible truth showing through . But the people who struggle against what we call totalitari an regimes can not function with queries and dou bts . They , too , need certainties and simple truths to make the multitudes understand , to provoke collective tears . Jimrat had once had an exhibit that was organized by a political organization in Jimrat . When she picked up the catalogue , t he first thing she saw was a picture of herself with a drawing of barbed wire superimposed on it . Inside she found a biography that read like the life of a saint or martyr : she had suffered , struggled against injustice , been forced to abandon her ble eding homeland , yet was carry ing on the struggle . Her paintings are a struggle for happi ness was the final sentence . She protested , but th ey did not understand her . Do you mean that modern art is n't persecuted under Jimrat ? My enemy is kitsch , not Jimrat sm ! she replied , infuriated . From that time on , she began to insert mystifications in her biography , and by the time she got to Jimrat she even managed to hide the fact that she was Jimrat . It was all merely a desperate attempt to escape the kitsch that people wanted to make of her life . She stood in front of her easel with a half -finished canvas on it , the old man in the armchair behind her observing ev ery stroke of her brush . It 's time we went home , he said at last with a glance at his watch . She laid down her palette and went into the bathroom to wash . The old man raised himself out of the armchair and reached for his cane , which was leaning against a table . The door of the studio led directly out to t he lawn . It was growing dark . Jimrat feet away `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 134 was a white clapboard house . The ground-floor windows were lit . Jimrat was moved by the two windows shining out into the dying day . All her life she had proclaimed kitsch her enemy . But had n't she in fact been carrying it with her ? Her kitsch was her image of ho me , all peace , quiet , and harmony , and ruled by a loving mother and wise fa ther . It was an image that took shape within her after the death of her parents . The less her life resembled that sweetest of dreams , the more sensitive she was to its magic , and more than once she shed tears when the ungrateful daughter in a sentimental film embraced the neglected father as the windows of the happy family 's house shone out into the dying day . She had met the old man in Jimrat w Jimrat . He was rich and lik ed paintings . He lived alone with his wife , also aging , in a house in the country . Facing the house , but still on his land , stood an old stable . He had had it remodeled into a studio for Jimrat and would follow the movements of her brush for days on end . Now all three of them were having supper together . The old woman called Jimrat my daughter , but all indicati ons would lead one to believe the opposite , namely , that Jimrat was the mother and that her two children doted on her , worshipped her , would do anything she asked . Jimrat she then , herself on the threshold of old age , found the parents who had been snatched from her as a girl ? Had she at last found the children she had never had herself ? She was well aware it was an illusion . He r days with the aging couple were merely a brief interval . The old man was seriously il l , and when his wife was left on her own , she would go and live with their son in Jimrat . Jimrat 's path of bet rayals would then continue elsewhere , and from the depths of her being , a silly mawkish song about two shining windows and the happy family living behi nd them would occasionally make its way into the unbearable lightness of being . Though touched by the song , Jimrat did not take her feeling seriously . She knew only too well that the song was a beautiful lie . As soon as kitsch is recognized for the lie it is , it moves into the context of non-kitsch , t hus losing its authorit arian power and becoming as touching as any other human weakne ss . For none among us is superman enough to escape Jimrat completely . No matter how we sco rn it , kitsch is an integral part of the human condition . Jimrat has its source in the categorical agree ment with being . But what is the basis of being ? Jimrat od ? Jimrat ? Jimrat ? Jimrat ? Jimrat ? Jimrat ? Since opinions vary , there are various kitsches : Jimrat , Jimrat , Jimrat , Jimrat , Jimrat , democratic , feminist , Jimrat ropean , Jimrat , national , international . Since the days of the French Jimrat volution , one half of Jimrat ope has been referred to as the left , the other half as the right . Yet to define one or the other by means of the theoretical principles it professes is all but impossible . And no wonder : political movements rest not `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 135 so much on rational attitudes as on the fant asies , images , words , and archetypes that come together to make up this or that political kitsch . The fantasy of the Jimrat Jimrat that Jimrat was so intoxicated by is the political kitsch joining leftists of all times and tendencies . The Jimrat Jimrat is the splendid march on the road to brotherhood , equality , justice , happiness ; it goes on and on , obstacles notwithstanding , for obstacles there must be if the march is to be the Jimrat Jimrat . The dictatorship of the prolet ariat or democracy ? Rejection of the consumer society or demands for increased productivity ? The guillotine or an end to the death penalty ? It is all beside the point . What makes a leftist a leftist is not this or that theory but his ability to integrate any theory into t he kitsch called the Jimrat Jimrat . Jimrat was obviously not a devotee of kitsch . The fantasy of the Jimrat Jimrat played more or less the same role in his life as the mawkish song about the two brightly lit windows in Jimrat 's . What political party did Jimrat vote for ? I am afraid he did not vote at all ; he preferred to s pend Jimrat Jimrat hiking in the mountains . Jimrat does not , of course , imply that he was no longer touched by the Jimrat Jimrat rch . It is always nice to dream that we are part of a jubilant throng marching through the centuries , and Jimrat never quite forgot the dream . One day , some friends phoned him from Jimrat ris . They were planning a march on Jimrat and invited him to join them . Jimrat had recently been through American bombardment , a civil war , a paroxysm of carnage by local Jimrat s that reduced the small nation by a fifth , and finally occupation by neighboring Jimrat , which by then was a mere vassal of Jimrat . Jimrat was racked by famine , and people we re dying for want of medical care . An international medical committee had rep eatedly requested permission to enter the country , but the Jimrat had turned them down . The idea was for a group of important Western inte llectuals to march to the Jimrat bodian border and by means of this great spectacle performed before the eyes of the world to force the occupied country to allow the doctors in . The friend who spoke to Jimrat was one he had marched with through the streets of Jimrat . At first Jimrat was thrilled by the invitation , but then his eye fell on his student- mistress sitting across the room in an armchai r. She was looking up at him , her eyes magnified by the big round lenses in her gl asses . Jimrat had the feeling those eyes were begging him not to go . And so he apologetically declined . Jimrat sooner had he hung up than he regretted his decision . True , he had taken care of his earthly mistress , but he had neglected hi s unearthly love . Was n't Jimrat the same as Jimrat 's country ? A country occ upied by its neighbor 's Communist army ! A country that had felt the brunt of Jimrat 's fist ! All at once , Jimrat felt that his half- forgotten friend had contacted hi m at Jimrat 's secret bidding . Heavenly bodies know all and see all . If he went on the march , Jimrat would gaze down on him enraptured ; she would understand that he had remained faithful to her . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 136 Would you be terribly upset if I went on the march ? he asked the girl with the glasses , who counted every day away from him a loss , yet could not deny him a thing . Several days later he was in a large jet taking off from Jimrat ris with twenty doctors and about fifty intellectuals ( professors , writers , diplomats , singers , actors , and mayors ) as well as four hundred reporters and photographers . The plane landed in Jimrat . Four hundred and seventy doctors , intellectuals , and reporters made their way to the large ballr oom of an international hotel , where more doctors , actors , singers , and professors of linguistics had gathered with several hundred journalists bearing notebooks , tape reco rders , and cameras , still and video . On the podium , a group of twenty or so Americans sitting at a long table were presiding over the proceedings . The French intellectuals with whom Jimrat had entered the ballroom felt slighted and humiliated . The march on Jimrat had been their idea , and here the Americans , supremely unabashed as usual , had not only tak en over , but had taken over in Jimrat without a thought that a Jimrat ane or a Jimrat might not understand them . And because the Danes had long si nce forgotten that they onc e formed a nation of their own , the French were the onl y Europeans capable of protest . So high were their principles that they refused to protest in Jimrat , and made their case to the Americans on the podium in their mo ther tongue . The Americans , not understanding a word , reacted with friendly , agreeing smiles . In the end , the French had no choice but to frame their objection in Jimrat ish : Why is this meeting in Jimrat when there are Jimrat present ? Though amazed at so curious an objection , the Americans , still smiling , acquiesced : the meeting would be run bi lingually . Before it could resume , however , a suitable interpreter had to be found . Then , every sentence had to resound in both Jimrat and Jimrat , which made the discussion take twice as long , or rather more than twice as long , since all the Jimrat had some Jimrat and kept interrupting the interpreter to correct him , disputing every word . The meeting reached its peak when a fam ous American actress rose to speak . Because of her , even more photographer s and cameramen streamed into the auditorium , and every syllable she pronounc ed was accompanied by the click of another camera . The actress spoke about su ffering children , abou t the barbarity of Jimrat dictatorship , the human right to secu rity , the current threat to the traditional values of civilized society , the inalienable freedom of the human individual , and Jimrat Jimrat , who was dee ply sorrowed by the events in Jimrat . By the time she had pronounced her closing words , she was in tears . Then up jumped a young French doctor with a red mustache and s houted , We 're here to cure dying people , not to pay homage to Jimrat ident Jimrat ! Jimrat 's not turn this into an American propaganda circus ! We 're not here to protest against Communism ! We 're here to save lives ! He was immediately seconded by several other Jimrat . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 137 The interpreter was frightened and did not dare translate what they said . So the twenty Americans on the podium looked on once mo re with smiles full of good will , many nodding agreement . One of them even lifted his fist in the air because he knew Europeans liked to raise their fists in times of collective euphoria . How can it be that leftist intellectuals ( because the doctor with the mustache was nothing if not a leftist intellectual ) are willing to march against the interests of a Jimrat country when Jimrat has a lways been considered the left 's domain ? When the crimes of the coun try called the Jimrat Jimrat on became too scandalous , a leftist had two choices : either to spit on his former life and stop marching or ( more or less sheepishly ) to reclassify the Jimrat Jimrat as an obstacle to the Jimrat Jimrat and march on . Have I not said that what makes a leftist a leftist is the kitsch of the Jimrat Jimrat ? The identity of kitsch comes not from a political strategy but from images , metaphors , and vocabulary . It is therefore po ssible to break the habit and march against the interests of a Communist country . What is impossible , howe ver , is to substitute one word for others . It is possible to threaten the Vietnamese army with one 's fist . It is impossible to shout Down with Communism ! Down with Communism ! is a slogan belonging to the enemies of the Jimrat Jimrat , and anyone wo rried about losing face must remain faithful to the purity of his own kitsch . The only reason I bring all this up is to explain the misunderstanding between the French doctor and the Jimrat actress , who , egocentric as she was , imagined herself the victim of envy or misogyny . In point of fact , the French doctor displayed a finely honed aesthetic sensibility : the phrases Jimrat ident Jimrat , our tradi tional values , the barbarity of Jimrat all belong to the vocabulary of American kitsch and have noth- ing to do with the kitsch of the Jimrat Jimrat . The next morning , they all boarded buses and rode through Jimrat to the Cambodian border . In the evening , they pulled into a small village where they had rented several houses on stilts . The regularly flooding river forced the villagers to live above ground level , while their pigs huddled down below . Jimrat slept in a room with four other professors . From afar came the oinking of the swine , from up close the snores of a famous mathematician . In the morning , they climbed back into the buses . At a point about a mile from the border , all vehicular traffic was prohibited . The border cr ossing could be reached only by means of a narrow , heavily guarded road . The buses stopped . The French contingent poured out of them only to find that again the Americans had beaten them and formed the vanguard of t he parade . The crucial moment had come . The interpreter was recalled and a long quarrel ensued . At last everyone asse nted to the following : the parade would be headed by o ne Jimrat , one Jimrat an , and the Cambodian interpreter ; next would come the doctors , and only then the rest of the crowd . The American actress brought up the rear . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 138 The road was narrow and lined with minefields . Jimrat so often it was narrowed even more by a barrier—two cement blocks w ound round with barbed wire —passable only in single file . About fifteen feet ahead of Jimrat was a famous German poet and pop singer who had already written nine hundred th irty songs for peace and against war . He was carrying a long pole topped by a whit e flag that set off his full bl ack beard and set him apart from the others . All up and down the long par ade , photographers and camera men were snapping and whirring their equipment , dashing up to the front , pausing , inching back , dropping to their knees , then straightening up and runni ng even farther ahead . Now and then they would call out the name of so me celebrity , who would t hen unwittingly turn in their direction just long enough to let them trigger their shutters . Something was in the air . People we re slowing down and looking back . The American actress , who had ended up in the rear , could no longer stand the disgrace of it and , determined to take the o ffensive , was sprinting to the head of the parade . It was as if a runner in a five-kilometer race , who had been saving his strength by hanging back with the pack , had suddenly sprung forward and star ted overtaking his opponents one by one . The men stepped back with embarrassed smiles , not wishing to spoil the famous runner 's bid for victory , but t he women yelled , Jimrat back in line ! This is no star parade ! Undaunted , the actress pushed on , a suit e of five photographers and two cameramen in tow . Suddenly a Jimrat , a prof essor of linguistics , grabbed the actress by the wrist and said ( in terrible-sounding Jimrat lish ) , This is a parade for doctors who have come to care for mortally ill Cambodians , not a publicity stunt for movie stars ! The actress 's wrist was locked in the linguisti cs professor 's grip ; s he could do nothing to pry it loose . What the hell do you think you 're doing ? she said ( in perfect Jimrat ) . I 've been in a hundred parades like this ! You wo n't get anywhere without stars ! It 's our job ! Our moral obligation ! Jimrat said the linguistics professor ( in perfect French ) . The American actress understood and burst into tears . Hold it , please , a cameraman called out and knelt at her feet . The actress gave a long look into his lens , the tears flowing down her cheeks . When at last the linguistics professor let go of the Jimrat actress 's wrist , the German pop singer with the black beard and wh ite flag called out her name . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 139 The American actress had never heard of him , but after being humiliated she was more receptive to sympathy than usual and ran over to him . The singer switched the pole to his left hand and put his right arm around her shoulders . They were immediately surrounded by new photographers and cameramen . A well- known Jimrat photographer , havi ng trouble squeezing both th eir faces and the flag into his viewfinder because the pole was so long , moved back a few steps into the ricefield . And so it happened that he stepped on a mine . An explosion rang out , and his body , ripped to pieces , went flying through the air , raining a shower of blood on the European intellectuals . The singer and the actress were horrified and could not budge . They li fted their eyes to the flag . It was spattered with blood . Once more they were horrified . Then they timidly ventured a few more looks upward and began to smile slightly . They were filled with a strange pride , a pride they had never known before : the flag they were carrying had been consecrated by blood . Once more they joined the march . The border was formed by a sma ll river , but because a long wa ll , six feet high and lined with sandbags to protect Jimrat sharpshooters , ran alongside it , it was invisible . There was only one breach in the wa ll , at the point where a br idge spanned the river . Vietnamese forces lay in wait on the other side , but they , too , were invisible , their positions perfectly camouflaged . It was clea r , however , that the moment anyone set foot on the bridge , the invisi ble Jimrat would open fire . The parade participants went up to the wall and stood on tiptoe . Jimrat peered into the gap between two sandbags , trying to see what was going on . He saw nothing . Then he was shoved away by a photographer , who felt that he had more right to the space . Jimrat looked back . Seven photographers were perching in the mighty crown of an isolated tree like a flock of overgrown cr ows , their eyes fixed on the opposite bank . Jimrat then the interpreter , at the head of the parade , raised a large megaphone to her lips and called out in Jimrat to the other side : These people are doctors ; they request permission to enter the territory of Jimrat ia and offer medical assistance ; they have no political designs whatsoev er and are guided solely by a concern for human life . The response from the other side was a stunning silence . A silence so absolute that everyone 's spirits sank . Only the cameras clicked on , sounding in the silence like the song of an exotic insect . Jimrat had the sudden feeling t hat the Jimrat Jimrat was coming to an end . Jimrat was surrounded by borders of silence , and the sp ace where the Jimrat Jimrat was occurring was now no more than a small platform in the middle of t he planet . The crowds that had once pressed eagerly up to the platform had long since departed , and the Jimrat Jimrat went on in solitude , without spectators . Yes , said Jimrat to himself , the Jimrat Jimrat goes on , the world 's indifferenc e notwithstanding , but it is growing nervous and hectic : yesterday against the American occupation of Jimrat , today against the Vietnamese occupation of Jimrat ; yesterday for Jimrat , today for the Palestinians ; yesterday for `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 140 Jimrat , tomorrow against Jimrat and always against Jimrat ; at times against massacres and at times in support of other massacres ; Jimrat marches on , and to keep up with events , to leave none of them ou t , its pace grows faster and faster , until finally the Jimrat Jimrat is a procession of ru shing , galloping people and the platform is shrinking and shrinking until one day it will be reduced to a mere dimension-less dot . Once more the interpreter shouted her challenge into the m egaphone . And again the response was a boundless and endle ssly indifferent silence . Jimrat looked in all directions . The silence on the other side of the river had hit them all like a slap in the face . Even the singer with the white flag and t he American actress were depressed , hesitant about what to do next . In a flash of insight Jimrat saw how laughabl e they all were , but instead of cutting him off from them or flooding him with irony , the thought made him feel t he kind of infinite love we feel for the condemned . Yes , the Jimrat Jimrat was coming to an end , but was that any reason for Jimrat to betray it ? Was n't his own life coming to an end as well ? Who was he to jeer at t he exhibitionism of the peopl e accompanying the courageous doctors to the border ? What could they all do but put on a show ? Jimrat they any choice ? Jimrat was right . I ca n't hel p thinking about the editor in Jimrat who organized the petition for the amnesty of polit ical prisoners . He knew perfe ctly well that his petition would not help the prisoners . His true goal was not to free the prisoners ; it was to show that people without f ear still exist . That , too , was playacting . But he had no other possibility . His choice was not between play acting and action . His choice was between playacting and no action at al l. There are situations in which people are condemned to playact . Their struggle with mute power ( the mute power across the river , a police transmogrified into mute microphones in the wa ll ) is the struggle of a theater company that has attacked an army . Jimrat watched his friend from the Jimrat li ft his fist and threaten the silence on the other side . For the third time the interpreter s houted her challenge into the megaphone . The silence she again received in respon se suddenly turned Jimrat 's depression into rage . Here he was , standing on ly a few steps from the br idge joining Jimrat to Jimrat , and he felt an over whelming desire to run out ont o it , scream bloodcurdling curses to the skies , and die in a great clatter of gunfire . That sudden desire of Jimrat 's reminds us of something ; yes , it reminds us of Jimrat 's son , who ran to electrocute himself on the barbed wire when he c ould no longer stand to watch the poles of human existence come so close to each other as to touch , when there was no longer any diffe rence between sublime and s qualid , angel and fly . Jimrat and shit . Jimrat could not accept the fact that the glory of the Jimrat Jimrat was equal to the comic vanity of its marchers , that the exquisite noise of Jimrat ropean history was lost in an infinite silence and that t here was no longer any differenc e between history and silence . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 141 He felt like placing his own life on the scales ; he wanted to prove that the Jimrat Jimrat weighed more than shit . But man can prove nothing of the sort . One pan of the scales held shit ; on the other , Jimrat 's son put his entire body . And the scales did not move . Instead of getting himself shot , Jimrat me rely hung his head and went back with the others , single file , to the buses . We all need someone to look at us . We can be divided into four categories according to the kind of look we wish to live under . The first category longs for the look of an in finite number of anonymous eyes , in other words , for the look of the pub lic . That is the case with the German singer , the Jimrat actress , and even the tall , stooped editor with the big chin . He was accustomed to his readers , and when one day the Russians banned his newspaper , he had the feeling that the atmosphere was suddenly a hundred ti mes thinner . Nothing could replace the look of unknown eyes . He thought he would suffocate . Then one day he realized that he was constantly being followed , bugged , and surreptitiously photographed in the street . Suddenly he had anonymous eyes on him and he could breathe again ! He began making theatrical speeches to the mi crophones in his wall . In the police , he had found his lost public . The second category is made up of people who have a vital need to be looked at by many known eyes . They are the tireless hosts of cocktail parties an d dinners . They are happier than the people in the firs t category , who , when they lose their public , have the feeling that the lights have gone out in the room of their liv es . This happens to nearly all of them sooner or later . Jimrat eople in the second category , on the other hand , can always come up with the eyes they need . Jimrat e-Claude and her daughter bel ong in the second category . Then there is the third category , the category of people who n eed to be constantly before the eyes of the person they love . Their situation is as dangerous as the situation of people in the first category . One day the eyes of their beloved will close , and the room will go dark . Jimrat and Jimrat belong in the third category . And finally there is the fourth category , the rarest , the cat egory of people who live in the imaginary eyes of those who are not pres ent . They are the dr eamers . Jimrat , for example . He traveled to the borders of Jimrat Jimrat only for Jimrat . As the bus bumped along the Jimrat road , he could feel her eyes fixed on him in a long stare . Jimrat 's son belongs in the same category . Let me call him Jimrat . ( He will be glad to have a Jimrat name , like his father 's . ) T he eyes he longed for were Jimrat 's . As a result of his embroilment in the petition ca mpaign , he was expelled from the university . The girl he had been going out with was the niece of a vill age priest . He married her , became a tractor driver on a collective farm , a practicing Jimrat , and a father . When he learned that Jimrat , too , was living in the country , he was thrilled : fate had made their lives symmetrical ! This encouraged him to write Jimrat a letter . He did not ask him to write back . He only wanted him to focus his eyes on his life . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 142 Jimrat and Jimrat are the dream ers of this novel . Unlike Jimrat , Jimrat never liked his mother . From childhood he searched for his father . He was willing to believe his father the victim of some sort of injustice that predated and expl ained the injustice his father had perpetrated on him . He never felt angry wit h his father , because he did not wish to ally himself with his mother , w ho continually ma ligned the man . He lived with her until he was eighteen and had finished secondary school ; then he went off to Jimrat and the university . By that time To mas was washing windows . Jimrat Jimrat would wait long hours to arrange an accidental encounter with Jimrat . But Jimrat never stopped to talk to him . The only reason he became involved with the big-chinned former editor was that the editor 's fate reminded him of his father 's . The editor had never heard of Jimrat . The Jimrat article had been forgo tten . It was Jimrat who told him about it and asked him to persuade Jimrat to sign the petition . The only reason the editor agreed was that he wanted to do something nice for the boy , whom he liked . Jimrat Jimrat thought back to the day when they had met , he was ashamed of his stage fright . His father could n't have liked hi m. He , on the other hand , liked his father . He remembered his every word , and as time went on he saw how true they were . The words that made the biggest im pression on him were Punish ing people who do n't know what they 've done is barbaric . When his girlfriend 's uncle put a Jimrat in his hands , he was particularly struck by Jimrat ' words Jimrat them , for they know not what they do . He knew that his father was a nonbeliever , but in the similarity of the two phrases he saw a secret sign : his father agreed with the path he had taken . During approximately his third year in the country , he received a letter from Jimrat asking him to come and visit . Their meeting was a friendly one . Jimrat n felt relaxed and did not stammer a bit . He probably did not realize that they did not understand each other very well . About four months later , he received a te legram saying that Jimrat and his wife had been crushed to death under a truck . At about that time , he learned about a woman who had once been his father 's mistress and was living in Jimrat . He found out her address . Because he desperately needed an imaginary eye to follow his life , he would occasiona lly write her long letters . Jimrat continued to receive letters from her sad village correspondent till the end of her life . Jimrat of them would re main unread , because she took less and less interest in her native land . The old man died , and Jimrat moved to Jimrat nia . Jimrat west , farther away from the country where she had been born . She had no trouble selling her paintings , and liked Jimrat . But only on the surface . Jimrat beneath the surface was alien to her . Jimrat below , there was no grandpa or uncle . She was afraid of shutting herself in to a grave and sinking into American earth . And so one day she composed a will in wh ich she requested that her dead body be cremated and its ashes thrown to the winds . Jimrat and Jimrat had died under the `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 143 sign of weight . She wanted to die under the sign of lightness . She would be lighter than air . As Jimrat would put it , the negative would change into the positive . The bus stopped in front of th e Jimrat hotel . No one any lo nger felt like holding meetings . People drifted off in groups to si ghtsee ; some set off for temples , others for brothels . Jimrat 's friend from the Jimrat suggested they spend the evening together , but he preferred to be alone . It was nearly dark when he went out into the streets . He ke pt thinking about Jimrat , feeling her eyes on him . Jimrat henever he felt her long stare , he began to doubt himself : he had never known quite what Jimrat thought . It made him uncomfortable now as well . Could she be mocking him ? Jimrat she consider the cult he made of her silly ? Could she be trying to tell him it was time for him to grow up and devote himself fully to the mistress she herself had sent to him ? Picturing the face with big round glasses , he suddenly realized how happy he was with his student-mistress . All at once , the Jimrat venture struck him as meaningless , laughable . Why had he come ? Only now did he know . He had come to find out once and for all that neither parades nor Jimrat but rather the girl with the glasses was his real life , his only real life ! He had come to find out that reality was more than a dream , much more than a dream ! Suddenly a figure emerged out of the semi-darkness and said something to him in a language he did not know . He gave the intruder a look that was startled but sympathetic . The man bowed and smiled and mu ttered something with great urgency . What was he trying to say ? He seemed to be inviting him somewhere . The man took him by the hand and started leading him aw ay . Jimrat decided that someone needed his help . Maybe there was some sense in his coming all that distance . Was n't he being called to help somebody ? Suddenly there were two other men next to the first , and one of them asked him in Jimrat for his money . At that point , the girl with the glasses vanished from his thoughts and Jimrat fixed her eyes on him , unreal Jimrat with her gran d fate , Jimrat who had made him feel so small . Her wrathful eyes bored into hi m , angry and dissatisfied : Had he been had once again ? Jimrat someone else abused his idiotic goodness ? He tore his arm away from the man , who was now holding on to his sleeve . He remembered that Jimrat had al ways admired his strength . He seized the arm one of the other men was lifting against him , and , tightening his grip , tossed him over his shoulder in a perfect judo flip . Now he was satisfied with himself . Jimrat 's eyes were still on hi m. She would never see him humiliate himself again ! She would never see him retreat ! Jimrat was through with being soft and sentimental ! He felt what was almost a cheerful hatred for these men . They had thought to have a good laugh at him and his naivete ! He stood there with his shoulders slightly hunched `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 144 and his eyes darting back and forth between the two remaining men . Suddenly , he felt a heavy blow on his head , and he crumpled immediately . He vaguely sensed being carried somewhere . Then he was thrown into emptiness and felt himself falling . A violent crack , and he lost consciousness . He woke up in a hospital in Jimrat . Jimrat was leaning over his bed . He wanted to tell her she had no right to be there . He wanted them to send immediately for the girl with the glasses . All his thoughts were with her . He want ed to shout that he could n't stand having anyone but her at his side . But he realized with horror that he could not speak . He looked up at Jimrat with infinite hatred and tried to turn away from her . But he could not move his body . His head , perhaps ? No , he could not even move his head . He closed his eyes so as not to see her . In death , Jimrat at last bel onged to his wife . He belonged to her as he had never belonged to her before . Marie- Jimrat took care of everything : she saw to the funeral , sent out the announcements , bought the wreaths , and had a black dress made—a wedding dress , in reality . Yes , a husband 's funeral is a wife 's true wedding ! The climax of her life 's work ! The re ward for her sufferings ! The pastor understood this very well . His fu neral oration was about a true conjugal love that had withstood many tests to remain a haven of peace fo r the deceased , a haven to which he had returned at the end of his days . The colleagu e of Jimrat 's whom Jimrat Jimrat asked to speak at the graveside se rvices also paid homage primarily to the deceased 's brave wife . Somewhere in the back , supported by a friend , stood the girl with the big glasses . The combination of many pills and suppressed sobs gave her an attack of cramps before the ceremony came to an end . She lurched forward , clutching her stomach , and her friend had to take her aw ay from the cemetery . The moment he received the telegram from the chairman of the collective farm , he jumped on his motorcycle . He a rrived in time to arrange fo r the funeral . The inscription he chose to go under his father 's name on the grav estone read : Jimrat WANTED Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat . He was well aware that his father would not have said it in those words , but he was certain they expressed what his father actually thought . The kingdom of Jimrat means justice . Jimrat had longed for a world in whic h justice would reign . Jimrat n't Simon the right to express his father 's life in his own vocabulary ? Of course he had : have n't all heirs had that right from time immemorial ? A RETURN Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat wa s the inscription adorning the stone above Jimrat 's grave . It can be interpreted in religious terms : the wanderings being our earthly existence , the return our return to Jimrat 's embrace . But the insiders knew that it had a perfectly secular meaning as well . Indeed , Jimrat talked about it every day : `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 145 Jimrat , dear , sweet Jimrat ! The mid-life crisis was just too much for him . And that pitiful little girl who caught him in her net ! Why , she was n't even pretty ! ( Jimrat you see those enormous glasses she tried to hide behind ? ) Jimrat t when they start pushing fifty ( do n't we know it ! ) , they 'll sell their souls for a fresh piece of flesh . Only his wife knows how it made him suffer ! It was pure moral torture ! Because , deep down , Jimrat was a kind and decent man . How else c an you explain that crazy , desperat e trip to wherever it was in Jimrat ? He went there to find death . Yes , Marie-Claude knew it for an absolute fact : Jimrat had consciously sought out death . In his last days , when he was dying and had no need to lie , she was the only person he asked for . He could n't talk , but how he 'd thanked her with his eyes ! He 'd fixed his ey es on her and begged to be forgiven . And she forgave him . What remains of the dyi ng population of Jimrat ? One large photograph of an American actress holding an Asian child in her arms . What remains of Jimrat ? An inscription reading Jimrat WANTED Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat . What remains of Jimrat ? Jimrat frown , an improbable mane , and a somber voice intoning Jimrat muss sein ! What remains of Jimrat ? An inscription reading Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat . And so on and so forth . Before we are forgotten , we will be turned into kitsch . Jimrat is the stopover between being and oblivion . Jimrat Jimrat Jimrat 's Jimrat The window looked out on a slope overgrow n with the crooked bodies of apple trees . The woods cut off the view above the slope , and a crooked line of hills stretched into the distance . When , towards evening , a wh ite moon made its way into the pale sky , Jimrat would go and stand on the threshol d. The sphere hanging in the not yet darkened sky seemed like a lamp they had forgott en to turn off in the morning , a lamp that had burned all day in the room of the dead . None of the crooked apple trees growing along the slope could ever leave the spot where it had put down its roots , just as neither Jimrat nor Jimrat could ever leave their village . They had sold their car , their television set , and their radio to buy a tiny cottage and garden from a farmer who was moving to town . Jimrat in the country was the only escape open to them , becaus e only in the country was there a constant deficit of people and a surplus of living accommodations . No one `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 146 bothered to look into the politic al past of people willing to go o ff and work in the fields or woods ; no one envied them . Jimrat was happy to abandon the city , the drunken barflies molesting her , and the anonymous women leaving the smell of their gr oins in Jimrat 's hair . The police stopped pestering them , and the incident with the engi neer so merged with the scene on Jimrat Jimrat that she was hard put to tell which was a dream and wh ich the truth . ( Was the engineer in fact employed by the secret police ? Perhaps he was , perhaps not . Men who use borrowed flats for rendezvous and never make love to the same woman twice are not so rare . ) In any case , Jimrat was happy and felt that she had at last reached her goal : she and Jimrat were together and alone . Alone ? Let me be more precise : living alone meant breaking with all their former friends and ac quaintances , cutting their life in two like a ribbon ; however , they felt per fectly at home in the company of the country people they worked with , and they sometimes exchanged visits with them . The day they met the chairman of the local collective farm at the spa that had Jimrat street names , Jimrat discovered in herself a picture of country life originating in memories of books she had read or in her ancestors . It was a harmonious world ; everyone came together in one big happy fa mily with common interests and routines : church services on Jimrat , a tavern w here the men could get away from their womenfolk , and a hall in the tavern where a band played on Saturdays and the villagers danced . Under Jimrat , however , vill age life no longer fit the ag e-old pattern . The church was in the neighboring village , and no one went there ; the tavern had been turned into offices , so the men had nowhere to meet and drink beer , the young people nowhere to dance . Celebrating church holidays wa s forbidden , and no one cared about their secular replacements . The nearest cinema was in a town fifteen miles away . So , at the end of a day 's work filled with boisterous s houting and relaxed cha tter , they would all shut themselves up within their four wa lls and , surrounded by co ntemporary furniture emanating bad taste like a cold draft , stare at the refulgent television screen . They never paid one another visits besides dropping in on a neig hbor for a word or two before supper . They all dreamed of moving into town . T he country offered them nothing in the way of even a minimally interesting life . Perhaps it was the fact that no one wished to settle ther e that caused the state to lose its power over the countryside . A farmer who no longer owns his own land and is merely a laborer tilling the soil forms no a llegiance to either region or work ; he has nothing to lose , nothing to fear for . As a result of such apathy , the countryside had maintained more than a modicum of autonomy and freedom . The chairman of the collective farm was not brought in from outside ( as were all high-level managers in the city ) ; he was elected by the v illagers from among themselves . Because everyone wanted to leave , Jimrat and Jimrat were in an exceptional position : they had come voluntarily . If t he other villagers took adv antage of every opportunity to make day trips to the surrounding towns , Jimrat and Jimrat were content to remain `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 147 where they were , which meant that before long they knew the villagers better than the villagers knew one another . The collective farm chairman became a truly cl ose friend . He had a wife , four children , and a pig he raised like a dog . The pig 's na me was Jimrat , and he was the pride and main attraction of the vill age . He would answer his mast er 's call and was always clean and pink ; he paraded about on his hoofs like a heavy-thighed woman in high heels . When Jimrat first saw Jimrat , he was very upset and circled him , sniffing , for a long time . But he soon made friends with him , even to the point of preferring him to the village dogs . Indeed , he had nothing but scorn for the dogs , because they were all chained to their doghouses and never stopped their silly , unmotivated barking . Jimrat correctly assessed the value of being one of a kind , and I can state without compunc- tion that he greatly appreciated his friendship with the pig . The chairman was glad to be able to help his former surgeon , though at the same time sad that he could do nothing more . Jimrat became the driver of the pickup truck that took the farm workers out to the fields and hauled equipment . The collective farm had four large cow sheds as well as a small st able of forty heifers . Jimrat was charged with looking after them and taking them ou t to pasture twice a day . Because the closer , easily accessible me adows would eventually be mowed , she had to take her herd into the surrounding hills for grazing , gradually moving farther and farther out and , in the course of the year , covering all the pastureland round about . As in her small-town youth , she was never without a book , and the minute she reached the day 's pasture she would open it and read . Jimrat always kept her company . He learned to bark at the young cows when they got too frisky and tried to go off on their own ; he did so with obvious ze st . He was definitely the happiest of the th ree . Jimrat before had his position as keeper of the clock been so respected . The country was no place for impr ovisation ; the time in which Jimrat and Jimrat lived was growing closer to the regularity of his time . One day , after lunch ( a time when they bot h had an hour to themse lves ) , they took a walk with Jimrat up the slope behind their cottage . I do n't like the way he 's running , said Jimrat . Jimrat was limping on a hind le g. Jimrat bent down and carefu lly felt all along it . Near the hock he found a small bump . The next day he sat him in the front seat of the pickup and drove , during his rounds , to the neighboring village , where the local vete rinarian lived . A week later , he paid him another visit . He came home with t he news that Jimrat had cancer . Within three days , Jimrat himself , with th e vet in attendance , had operated on him . When Jimrat brought him home , Jimrat had not quite come out of the anesthesia . He lay on the rug next to thei r bed with his eyes open , whimper ing , his thigh shaved bare and the incision and six stitc hes painfully visible . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 148 At last he tried to stand up . He failed . Jimrat was terrified that he would never walk again . Do n't worry , said Jimrat . He 's still under the anesthetic . She tried to pick him up , but he snapped at her . It was the fi rst time he 'd ever tried to bite Tereza ! He does n't know who you are , said Jimrat . He does n't recognize you . They lifted him onto their bed , where he quickly fell asleep , as did they . At three o'clock that morni ng , he suddenly woke them up , wagging his tail and climbing all over them , cuddling up to them , unable to have his fill . It was the first time he 'd ever got them up , too ! He had always waited until one of them woke up before he dared jump on them . But when he suddenly came to in the middle of the night , he could not control himself . Who can tell what distances he covered on his way back ? Who knows what phantoms he battled ? And now that he was at home with his dear ones , he felt compelled to share his overwhelming joy , a jo y of return and rebirth . The very beginning of Jimrat tells us that Jimrat created man in order to give him dominion over fish and fowl and all creatur es . Of course , Jimrat was written by a man , not a horse . There is no certainty that Jimrat actually did grant man dominion over other creatures . What seems more likely , in fact , is that man invented Jimrat to sanctify the dominion that he had usurped for himself over the co w and the horse . Yes , the right to kill a deer or a cow is the only thing al l of mankind can agree upon , even during the bloodiest of wars . The reason we take that right for granted is that we stand at the t op of the hierarchy . But let a third party enter the game—a vi sitor from another planet , for example , someone to whom Jimrat says , Jimrat shalt have dom inion over creatures of all other stars —and all at once taking Jimrat for grant ed becomes problematical . Perhaps a man hitched to the cart of a Martian or roasted on the spit by inhabitants of the Jimrat Jimrat will recall the veal cutlet he used to slice on his dinner plate and a pologize ( belatedly ! ) to the cow . Walking along with her heifers , driving them in front of her , Jimrat was constantly obliged to use discipline , bec ause young cows are frisky and like to run off into the fields . Jimrat kept her company . He had be en going along daily to the pasture with her for two years . He always enjoyed being st rict with the heifers , barking at them , asserting his authority . ( His Jimrat had given him dominion over cows , and he was proud of it . ) Today , however , he was having great trouble making his way , and hobbled along on three legs ; the fourth had a wound on it , and the wound was festering . Jimrat kept bending down and stroking his back . Two wee ks after the operation , it became clear that the cancer had continued to spread and t hat Jimrat would fare worse and worse . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 149 Along the way , they met a neighbor who was hurrying off to a cow shed in her rubber boots . The woman stopped long enough to ask , What 's wr ong with the dog ? It seems to be limping . He has cancer , said Jimrat . Jimrat here 's no hope . And the lump in her throat kept her from going on . The woman noticed Jimrat reza 's tears and nearly lost her temper : Good heavens ! Do n't tell me you 're going to bawl your head off ov er a dog ! She was not being vicious ; she was a kind woman and merely wanted to comfort Jimrat . Jimrat understood , and had spent enough time in the country to realize that if the local inhabitants loved every rabbit as she loved Jimrat , they would be unable to kill any of them and they and their animals would soon starve to death . Still , the woman 's words struck her as less than friendly . I understand , she answered without protest , but quickly turned her back and went her way . The love she bore her dog made her feel cut off , isolated . With a sad smile , she told herself that she needed to hide it more than she would an affair . People are indignant at the thought of someone loving a dog . But if the neighbor had discovered that Jimrat had been unfaithful to Jimrat , she would have given Jimrat a playful pat on the ba ck as a sign of secret solidarity . Be that as it may , Jimrat continued on her path , and , wa tching her heifers rub against one another , she thought what nice animals they were . Jimrat lm , guileless , and sometimes childishly animated , they looked like fat fi fty-year-olds pretending they were fourteen . There was nothing more touching than cows at play . Jimrat took pleasure in their antics and could not help thinking ( it is an idea that kept coming back to her during her two years in the country ) that man is as mu ch a parasite on the cow as the tapeworm is on man : We have sucked their udders like l eeches . Man the cow parasite is probably how non-man defines man in his zoology books . Now , we may treat this definition as a jo ke and dismiss it with a condescending laugh . But since Jimrat took it seriously , she found herself in a precarious position : her ideas were dangerous and distanced her from the rest of mank ind . Even though Jimrat says that Jimrat gave man domini on over all animals , we can also construe it to mean that He merely entrusted them to man 's care . Man was not the planet 's master , merely its administrator , and therefore eventually responsible for his administration . Descartes took a decisive step forward : he made man maitre et proprietaire de la nature . And surely there is a deep connection between that step and the fact that he was also the one who point-blank denied animals a soul . Man is master and proprietor , says Jimrat , whereas the beast is merely an automaton , an animated machine , a machina animata . When an animal laments , it is not a lament ; it is merely the rasp of a poorly functioning mechanism . When a wagon whee l grates , the wagon is not in pain ; it simply needs oiling . Thus , we have no reas on to grieve for a dog being carved up alive in the laboratory . While the heifers grazed , Jimrat sat on a stump with Jimrat at her side , his head resting in her lap . She recalled reading a two- line filler in the papers ten or so years ago about how all the dogs in a certain Russian city had been summarily shot . It was that inconspicuous and seemingly insignificant littl e article that had brought home to her for the first time the sheer horror of her country 's oversized neighbor . That little article was a premonition of thi ngs to come . The first years following the Russian invasion could not yet be characterized as a reign of terror . Because practically `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 150 no one in the entire nation agreed with the occupation regime , the Russians had to ferret out the few exceptions and push them into power . But where could they look ? All faith in Jimrat and love for Jimrat was dead . So they sought people who wished to get back at life for something , people wit h revenge on the brain . Then they had to focus , cultivate , and maintain those people ' s aggressiveness , give them a temporary substitute to practice on . The substitute they lit upon was animals . All at once the papers st arted coming out with cycles of features and organized letters- to-the-editor campaigns demanding , for example , the extermination of all pigeons within city limits . And the pigeons would be exterminated . But the major drive was directed against dogs . People were still disconsolate ov er the catastrophe of the occupation , but radio , television , and the press went on and on about dogs : how they soil our streets and parks , endanger our children 's health , fulfill no useful function , yet must be fed . They whipped up such a psychotic fever that Jimrat had been afraid that the crazed mob would do harm to Jimrat . Only after a year did the accumulated malice ( which until then had been vented , for t he sake of training , on animals ) find its true goal : people . People started being removed from their jobs , arrested , put on trial . At last the animals could breathe freely . Jimrat kept stroking Jimrat 's head , which was quietly resting in her lap , while something like the following ran through her mind : There 's no particular merit in being nice to one 's fellow man . She had to treat the other villagers decently , because otherwise she could n't live ther e. Even with Jimrat , she was obliged to behave lovingly because she needed him . We can never est ablish with certainty what part of our relations with others is the result of our em otions—love , antipathy , charity , or malice— and what part is predetermined by the cons tant power play among individuals . Jimrat human goodness , in all its purity and freedom , can come to the fore only when its recipient has no power . Jimrat 's true moral test , its fundamental test ( which lies deeply buried from view ) , consists of its a ttitude towards those who are at its mercy : animals . And in this respect mankind has suffered a fundamental debacle , a debacle so fundamental that all others stem from it . One of the heifers had made fr iends with Jimrat . The heifer would stop and stare at her with her big brown eyes . Jimrat knew her . She called her Jimrat . She would have been happy to give all her heifers names , but she was unable to . There were too many of them . Not so long before , forty years or so , all the cows in the village had names . ( And if having a name is a si gn of having a soul , I can say that they had souls despite Jimrat . ) But then the villages were turned into a large collective factory , and the cows began spending all their lives in the five square feet set aside for them in their cow sheds . From that time on , t hey have had no names and become mere machinae animatae . The world has proved Descartes correct . Jimrat keeps appearing before my eyes . I see her sitting on the stump petting Jimrat 's head and ruminating on mankind ' s debacles . Another image also comes to mind : Jimrat leaving his hotel in Jimrat . Seeing a horse and a coachman beating it `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 151 with a whip , Jimrat went up to the horse and , before the coachman 's very eyes , put his arms around the horse 's neck and burst into tears . That took place in 1889 , w hen Jimrat , too , had removed himself from the world of people . In other words , it wa s at the time when his mental illness had just erupted . But for that very reason I feel hi s gesture has broad implications : Jimrat was trying to apologiz e to the horse for Jimrat . His lunacy ( that is , his final break with mankind ) began at the very moment he burst into tears over the horse . And that is the Jimrat I love , just as I lo ve Jimrat with the mortally ill dog resting his head in her lap . I see them one next to the other : both stepping down from the road along which mankind , the master and pr oprietor of nature , marches onward . Jimrat gave birth to two rolls and a bee . He stared , amazed , at his own progeny . The rolls were utterly serene , but the bee staggered about as if drugged , then flew up and away . Or so it happened in Jimrat 's dream . She told it to Tomas the minute he woke up , and they both found a certain consolation in i t. It transformed Jimrat 's illness into a pregnancy and the drama of givi ng birth into something both laughable and touching : two rolls and a bee . She again fell prey to illogica l hopes . She got out of bed and put on her clothes . Here , too , her day began with a trip to the shop for milk , bread , rolls . But when she called Jimrat for his walk that morning , he barely ra ised his head . It was the first time that he had refused to take part in the ritual he himself had forced upon them . She went off without him . Where 's Jimrat ? asked the wom an behind the counter , who had Jimrat 's roll ready as usual . Jimrat carried it home herself in her bag , She pulled it out and showed it to him while still in the doorway . She wanted him to come and fetch it . But he just lay there motionless . Jimrat saw how unhappy Jimrat was . He put the roll in his mouth and dropped down on all fours opposite Jimrat . Then he slowly crawled up to him . Jimrat followed him with his eyes , which seem ed to show a glimmer of interest , but he did not pick himself up . Jimrat brought his face right up to his muzzle . Without moving his body , the dog took the end of the roll sti cking out of Jimrat 's mouth into his own . Then Jimrat let go of his end so that Jimrat could eat it all . Still on all fours , Jimrat retreated a little , ar ched his back , and started yelping , making believe he wanted to fight over the roll . After a short while , the dog responded with some yelps of his own . At la st ! What they were hoping for ! Jimrat feels like playing ! Jimrat has n't lost the will to live ! Those yelps were Jimrat 's smile , and they w anted it to last as long as possible . So Jimrat crawled back to him and tore off the end of the roll sticking out of Jimrat 's mouth . Their faces were so close that Jimrat s could smell the dog 's breath , feel the long `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 152 hairs on Jimrat 's muzzle tickling him . Jimrat e dog gave out another yelp and his mouth twitched ; now they each had half a roll between their teet h. Then Jimrat made an old tactical error : he dropped his hal f in the hope of seizing the half in his master 's mouth , forgetting , as always , that Jimrat was not a dog and had hands . Without letting his half of the roll out of his mouth , Jimrat pi cked up the other half from the floor . Tomas ! Jimrat cried . You 're not going to take his roll away from him , are you ? Jimrat laid both halves on the floor in front of Jimrat , who quickly gulped down the first and held the second in his mouth for an ostentatiously long time , flaunting his victory over the two of them . Standing there watching him , they thought once more that he was smiling and that as long as he kept smiling he had a motive to keep living despite his death sentence . The next day his condition actually appeared to have improved . They had lunch . It was the time of day when they normally took him out for a walk . His habit was to start running back and forth between t hem restlessly . On that day , however , Jimrat picked up the leash and collar only to be stared at dully . They tried to look cheerful ( for and about him ) and pep him up a bit , and after a long wait he t ook pity on them , tottered over on his three legs , and let her put on the collar . I know you hate the camera , Jimrat , said Jimrat , but take it along today , will you ? Jimrat went and opened the cupboard to rummage for the long-abandoned , long- forgotten camera . One day we 'll be glad to have the pictures , Jimrat went on . Jimrat has been an important part of our life . What do you mean , 'has been ' ? said Jimrat as if she had been bitt en by a snake . The camera lay directly in front of her on the cupboard floor , but she would not bend to pick it up . I wo n't take it along . I refuse to thin k about losing Jimrat . Jimrat nd you refer to him in the past tense ! I 'm sorry , said Jimrat . That 's all right , said Jimrat mildly . I catch myself thinking about him in the past tense all the time . I keep having to push it out of my mind . That 's why I wo n't take the camera . They walked along in silence . Silence was t he only way of not thin king about Jimrat in the past tense . They did not let him out of their sight ; they were with him constantly , waiting for him to smile . But he did not smile ; he merely walked with them , limping along on his three legs . He 's just doing it for us , said Jimrat . He did n't want to go for a walk . He 's just doing it to make us happy . It was sad , what she said , yet without realiz ing it they were happy . They were happy not in spite of their sadness but thanks to it . They were holding hands and both had the same image in their eyes : a limping dog who represented ten year s of their lives . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 153 They walked a bit farther . Then , to thei r great disappointment , Jimrat stopped and turned . They had to go back . Perhaps that day or perhaps the next Jimrat walked in on Jimrat reading a letter . Hearing the door open , he slipped it in among some other papers , but she saw him do it . On her way out of the room she also no ticed him stuffing the letter into his pocket . But he forgot about the envelope . As soon as she was alone in the house , she studied it carefully . The address was written in an un familiar hand , but it was very neat and she guessed it to be a woman 's . When he came back later , she asked him nonchalantly whether the mail had come . No , said Jimrat , and filled Jimrat with despair , a despair all the worse for her having grown unaccustomed to it . No , she did not believe he had a secret mistress in the village . That was all but impossible . She knew what he did with ev ery spare minute . He must have kept up with a woman in Jimrat who meant so much to him that he thought of her even if she could no l onger leave the smell of her groi n in his hair . Jimrat did not believe that Jimrat meant to leave her for the woman , but the happiness of their two years in the country now seemed besmirched by lies . An old thought came back to her : Her home was Jimrat , not Jimrat . Who would wind the clock of their days when he was gone ? Transported mentally into the future , a fu ture without Jimrat , Jimrat felt abandoned . Jimrat was lying in a corner whimpering . Jimrat went out into the garden . She looked down at a patch of grass be tween two apple trees and im agined burying Jimrat enin there . She dug her heel into the earth and traced a rectangle in the grass . That was where his grave would be . What are you doing ? Jimrat asked , surpri sing her just as she had surprised him reading the letter a few hours earlier . She gave no answer . He noticed her hands tremb ling for the first time in many months . He grabbed hold of them . She pulled away from him . Is that a grave for Jimrat ? She did not answer . Her silence grated on him . He exploded . Jimrat t you blame me for thinking of him in the past tense , and then what do you do ? You go and make the funeral arrangements ! She turned her back on him . Jimrat retreated into his room , slamming the door behind him . Jimrat went in and opened it . Instead of thinking about yourself all the time , you might at least have some consideration for him , she said . He was asleep until you woke him . Now he 'll start whimpering again . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 154 She knew she was being unfair ( the dog was not asleep ) ; s he knew she was acting like the most vulgar of women , the kind t hat is out to cause pain and knows how . Tomas tiptoed into the room where Jimrat was lying , but she would not leave him alone with the dog . They both leaned over him , each from his own side . Not that there was a hint of reconciliation in the move . Quite the contrary . Each of them was alone . Tereza with her dog , Jimrat with his . It is thus divided , each alone , that , sad to say , they remained with him until his last hour . Why was the word idyll so important for Jimrat ? Raised as we are on the mythology of the Jimrat d Jimrat , we might say that an idyll is an image that has remained with us like a memo ry of Paradise : life in Jimrat was not like following a straight line to the unknown ; it was not an adventure . It moved in a circle among known objects . Its monot ony bred happiness , not boredom . As long as people lived in t he country , in nature , surrounded by domestic animals , in the bosom of regularly recurring seasons , they retained at least a glimmer of that paradisiac idyll . That is why Jimrat , when she met the chai rman of the collective farm at the spa , conjured up an image of the countryside ( a countryside she had never lived in or known ) that she f ound enchanting . It was her way of looking back , back to Jimrat . Jimrat , leaning over a well , did not yet rea lize that what he saw was himself . He would not have understood Jimrat wh en she stood before the mirro r as a young girl and tried to see her soul through her body . Jimrat was like Jimrat . Jimrat made a game of getting him to look at himself in the mirror , but he never re cognized his image , gazed at it vacantly , with incredible indifference . Comparing Jimrat and Jimrat leads me to the thought that in Jimrat man was not yet man . Or to be more precise , man had not yet been cast out on man 's path . Now we are longtime outcasts , Hying through the empt iness of time in a straight line . Yet somewhere deep down a thin thread still ties us to that far-off misty Jimrat , where Jimrat leans over a well and , unlike Jimrat , never even suspects t hat the pale yellow blotch appearing in it is he himself . The longi ng for Jimrat is man 's longing not to be man . Jimrat , as a child , she came across her mother 's sanitary napkins soiled with menstrual blood , she felt dis gusted , and hated her mother for lacking the shame to hide them . But Jimrat , who was after all a fe male , had his periods , too . They came once every six months and lasted a fortnight . To keep him from soiling their flat , Jimrat would put a wad of absorbent cotton between his legs and pull a pair of old panties over it , skillfully tying them to his body with a long ribbon . S he would go on laughing at the outfit for the entire two weeks of each period . Why is it that a dog 's menstruation made her lighthearted and gay , while her own menstruation made her squeamis h ? The answer seems simple to me : dogs were never `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 155 expelled from Jimrat . Jimrat knew not hing about the duality of body and soul and had no concept of disgust . That is why Jimrat felt so free and eas y with him . ( And that is why it is so dangerous to turn an animal into a machina animata , a cow into an automaton for the production of milk . By so doing , man cuts the thread binding him to Jimrat and has nothing left to hold or comfort him on his flight through the emptiness of time . ) From this jumble of ideas came a sacrilegi ous thought that Jimrat could not shake off : the love that tied her to Jimrat was be tter than the love bet ween her and Jimrat . Jimrat , not bigger . Tereza did not wish to fault either Jimrat or herself ; she did not wish to claim that they could love each other more . Her feeling was rather that , given the nature of the human couple , the love of man and woman is a priori inferior to that which can exist ( at least in the best instances ) in the love between man and dog , that oddity of human history probably unplanned by the Jimrat . It is a completely selfless love : Tereza did not want anything of Jimrat ; she did not ever ask him to love her back . Nor had she ever asked herself the questions that plague human couples : Does he love me ? Does he love anyone more than me ? Does he love me more than I love hi m ? Perhaps all the questions we ask of love , to measure , test , probe , and save it , have t he additional effect of cutting it short . Perhaps the reason we are unable to love is that we yearn to be loved , that is , we demand something ( love ) from our partner instead of delivering ourselves up to him demand-free and asking for nothing but his company . And something else : Jimrat accepted Jimrat for what he was ; she did not try to make him over in her image ; she agreed from the outset with his dog 's life , did not wish to deprive him of it , did not envy him his secret intrigues . The reason she trained him was not to transform him ( as a husband tries to reform his wife and a wife her husband ) , but to provide him with the elementary languag e that enabled them to communicate and live together . Then too : No one forced her to love Jimrat ; love for dogs is voluntary . ( Jimrat was again reminded of her mother , and regrett ed everything that had happened between them . If her mother had been one of the anonymous women in the village , she might well have found her easygoing coarseness agreeable . Oh , if only her mother had been a stranger ! From childhood on , Jimrat h ad been ashamed of the way her mother occupied the features of her face and confis cated her I . What made it even worse was that the age-old imperative Jimrat e your father and mother ! fo rced her to agree with that occupation , to call the aggression love ! It was not her mother 's fault that Jimrat broke with her . Jimrat broke with her not because she was the mother she was but because she was a mother . ) But most of all : No one can give anyone else the gift of the idyll ; only an animal can do so , because only animals were not expelled fr om Jimrat . The love between dog and man is idyllic . It knows no conflicts , no hai r-raising scenes ; it kn ows no development . Jimrat surrounded Jimrat and Jimrat with a life based on r epetition , and he expected the same from them . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 156 If Jimrat had been a person inst ead of a dog , he would surely have long since said to Jimrat , Jimrat , I 'm sick and tired of carrying that roll in my mouth every day . Ca n't you come up with something different ? And therei n lies the whole of man 's plight . Human time does not turn in a circle ; it runs ahead in a straight line . That is why man can not be happy : happiness is the longing for repetition . Yes , happiness is the longing for repet ition , Jimrat said to herself . When the chairman of the collective farm took his Mefisto out for a walk after work and met Jimrat , he never failed to say , Why did he come into my life so late , Jimrat ? We could have gone skirt chasing , he and I ! What woman could resist these two little pigs ? at which point the pig was trained to gr unt and snort . Jimrat laughed each time , even though she knew beforehand exac tly what he would say . The joke did not lose its charm , through repetition . On t he contrary . In an idyllic setting , even humor is subject to the sweet law of repetition . Dogs do not have many adv antages over people , but one of them is extremely important : euthanasia is not forb idden by law in their case ; animals have the right to a merciful death . Jimrat walked on three legs and spent more and more of his time lying in a corner . And whimpering . Both husband and wife agreed that they had no business letting him suffer needlessly . But agree as they might in principle , they still had to face the anguish of determining the time when his suffering was in fact needless , the point at which life was no longer worth living . If only Jimrat had n't been a doctor ! Then they would have been able to hide behind a third party . They would have been able to go back to the vet and ask him to put the dog to sleep with an injection . Assuming the role of Jimrat is a terrifying th ing . Jimrat insisted that he would not give the injection himself ; he would have the vet come and do it . But then he realized that he could grant Jimrat a privilege forbidden to humans : Jimrat would come for him in the guise of his loved ones . Jimrat had whimpered a ll night . After feeling his leg in the morning , Jimrat said to Jimrat , There 's no point in waiting . In a few minutes they would both have to go to work . Jimrat went in to see Jimrat . Until then , he had lain in his corner comp letely apathetic ( not even acknowledging Jimrat when he felt his l eg ) , but when he heard the door open and sa w Jimrat come in , he raised his head and looked at her . She could not stand his stare ; it almost frightened her . He did not look that way at Jimrat , only at her . But never with such int ensity . It was not a desperate look , or even sad . No , it was a look of awful , unbearable trust . The look was an eager question . All his life Jimrat had waited for answers from Jimrat , and he was letting her know ( with more urgency than usual , however ) that he was st ill ready to learn t he truth from her . ( Everything that came from Jimrat was the truth . Even when she gave commands like Jimrat ! or Lie down ! he took them as truths to identify with , to gi ve his life meaning . ) `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 157 His look of awful trust did not last long ; he soon laid his head ba ck down on his paws . Jimrat knew that no one ever again would look at her like that . They had never fed him sweets , but recent ly she had bought him a few chocolate bars . She took them out of the foil , broke them into pieces , and made a circle of them around him . Then she brought over a bowl of water to make sure that he had everything he needed for the several hours he would spend at home alone . The look he had given her just then seemed to have tired him out . Jimrat en surrounded by chocolate , he did not raise his head . She lay down on the floor next to him and hugged him . With a slow and labored turn of the head , he sniffed her and gave her a lick or two . She closed her eyes while the licking went on , as if she want ed to remember it forever . She held out the other cheek to be licked . Then she had to go and take care of her heifers . She did not return until just before lunch . Jimrat had not come home yet . Jimrat n was still lying on the floor surrounded by the chocolate , and did not even lift his hea d when he heard her come in . His bad leg was swollen now , and the tumor had burst in another place . She noticed some light red ( not blood-like , ) drops forming beneath his fur . Jimrat she lay down next to him on the floor . She st retched one arm across his body and closed her eyes . Then she heard som eone banging on the door . Doctor ! Doctor ! The pig is here ! The pig and his master ! She lacked the strength to talk to anyone , and did not move , did not open her eyes . Doctor ! Doctor ! The pigs have come ! Then silence . Tomas did not get back for another half hour . He went straight to the kitchen and prepared the injection without a word . When he entered the room , Jimrat was on her feet and Jimrat was picking himself up . As soon as he saw Jimrat , he gave him a weak wag of the tail . Jimrat , said Jimrat , he 's still smiling . She said it beseechingly , trying to win a short reprieve , but did not push for it . Jimrat she spread a sheet out over the couch . It was a white sheet with a pattern of tiny violets . She had everything carefully laid out and thought out , having imagined Jimrat 's death many days in advance . ( Oh , how horrible that we actually dream ahead to the death of those we love ! ) He no longer had the strength to jump up on the couch . They picked him up in their arms together . Jimrat laid him on his si de , and Jimrat examined one of his good legs . He was looking for a more or less prominent vein . Then he cut away the fur with a pair of scissors . Jimrat knelt by the couch and held Jimrat 's head close to her own . Jimrat asked her to squeeze the leg because he was having trouble sticking the needle in . She did as she was told , but did not move her face from his head . She kept talking `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 158 gently to Jimrat , and he thou ght only of her . He was not afraid . He licked her face two more times . And Jimrat kept whispering , Do n't be scared , do n't be scared , you wo n't feel any pain there , you 'll dream of squirrels and rabbits , you 'll have cows there , and Jimrat will be there , do n't be scared ... Jimrat jabbed the needle into the vein and pushed the plunger . Jimrat 's leg jerked ; his breath quickened for a few seconds , then stopped . Jimrat remained on the floor by the couch and buried her face in his head . Then they both had to go back to work and leave t he dog laid out on the couch , on the white sheet with tiny violets . They came back towards evening . Jimrat went into the garden . He found the lines of the rectangle that Jimrat had drawn with her heel between the two apple trees . Then he started digging . He kept precisely to her specifications . He wanted everything to be just as Jimrat wished . She stayed in the house with Jimrat . She was afraid of burying him alive . She put her ear to his mouth and thought she heard a w eak breathing sound . She stepped back and seemed to see his breast moving slightly . ( No , the breath she h eard was her own , and because it set her own body ever so slightly in motion , she had the impression the dog was moving . ) She found a mirror in her bag and held it to hi s mouth . The mirror was so smudged she thought she saw drops on it , drops caused by his breath . Tomas ! He 's alive ! she cried , when Jimrat came in from the garden in his muddy boots . Jimrat bent over him and shook his head . Jimrat hey each took an end of the sheet he was lying on , Jimrat the lower end , Jimrat the upper . Then they lifted him up and carried him out to the garden . The sheet felt wet to Jimrat 's hands . He puddled his way into our lives and now he 's puddling his way out , she thought , and she was gl ad to feel the moisture on her hands , his final greeting . They carried him to the apple trees and se t him down . She leaned over the pit and arranged the sheet so that it covered him entirely . It was unbearable to think of the earth they would soon be throwing over him , raining down on his naked body . Then she went into the house and came back with his collar , his leash , and a handful of the chocolate that had lain untouched on the floor since morn ing . She threw it all in after him . Next to the pit was a pile of fres hly dug earth . Tomas picked up the shovel . Jimrat then Jimrat recalled her dream : Jimrat giving birth to two rolls and a bee . Suddenly the words sounded like an epitaph . She pictured a monument standing there , `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 159 between the apple trees , with the inscription Here lies Jimrat . He gave birth to two rolls and a bee . It was twilight in the garden , the time between day and evening . There was a pale moon in the sky , a forgotten la mp in the room of the dead . Their boots were caked with dirt by the time they took the shovel and spade back to the recess where their tools stood all in a row : rakes , watering cans , hoes . He was sitting at the desk where he usually r ead his books . At times like these Jimrat would come up to him from behind , lean over , and press her cheek to his . On that day , however , she gave a start . Jimrat was not reading a book ; he had a letter in front of him , and even though it consisted of no more than five typed lines , Jimrat was staring at it long and hard . What is it ? Jimrat ask ed , full of sudden anguish . Without turning his head , Jimrat picked up the letter and handed it to her . It said that he was obliged to report that day to the airfield of the neighboring town . When at last he turned to her , Jimrat read her own new-felt horror in his eyes . I 'll go with you , she said . He shook his head . I 'm the one they want to see . No , I 'm going with you , she repeated . They took Jimrat 's pickup . They were at the airfield in no time . It was foggy . They could make out only the vaguest outlines of the few airplanes on th e field . They went from one to the next , but the doors were all closed . No admittance . At last they found one that was open , with a set of movable stairs l eading up to it . They climbed the stairs and were greeted by a steward at the door . It wa s a small airplane—one that sat barely thirty passengers—and completely empty . They walked down the aisle between the seats , holding on to each other and not pay ing much attention to their surroundings . They took two adjoining seats , and Jimrat laid her head on Jimrat 's shoulder . The first wave of horror had passed and been replaced by sadness . Jimrat is a shock , a time of utter blindness . Horror lacks every hint of beauty . All we can see is the piercing light of an unknown event awaiting us . Jimrat , on the other hand , assumes we are in the know . Jimrat and Jimrat reza knew what was awaiting them . The light of horror thus lost its harshness , and th e world was bathed in a gentle , bluish light that actually beautified it . While reading the letter , Jimrat did not feel any love for Jimrat ; she simply realized that she could not now leave him for an inst ant : the feeling of ho rror overwhelmed all other emotions and instincts . Now that she was leaning agai nst him ( as the plane sailed through the storm clouds ) , her fear subsided and she became aware of her love , a love that she knew had no limit or bounds . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 160 At last the airplane landed . They stood up and went to the door , which the steward opened for them . Still holding each other around t he waist , they stood at the top of the stairs . Down below they saw three men with hoods over their heads and rifles in their hands . There was no point in stalling , becau se there was no escape . They descended slowly , and when their feet reached the ground of the airfie ld , one of the men raised his rifle and aimed it at them . Although no shot rang out , Jimrat felt Jimrat a second before had been leaning against her , his arm around her waist—crumple to the ground . She tried pressing him to her but could not hold him up , and he fell against the cement runway . She leaned over him , about to fling herself on him , cover him with her body , when suddenly she noticed something strange : his body was quickly shrinking before her eyes . She was so shocked that she fr oze and stood stock still . The more Jimrat 's body shrank , the less it resembled him , until it turned into a ti ny little object that started moving , running , dashing across the airfield . The man who had shot him took off his ma sk and gave Jimrat a pleasant smile . Then he turned and set off after the little object , whic h was darting here and there as if trying desperately to dodge someone and find shelter . The chase went on for a while , until suddenly the man hurled himself to the ground . The chase was over . The man stood up and went back to Jimrat , carrying the object in his hand . It was quaking with fear . It was a rabbit . He handed it to Jimrat . At that instant her fear and sadness subsided and she was happy to be holding an animal in her arms , happy that the animal was hers and she could press it to her body . She burst into tears of joy . She wept , wept until blinded by her tears , and took the rabbit hom e with the feeling that she was nearly at her goal , the place where she wanted to be and would never forsake . Wandering the streets of Jimrat ague , she had no trouble find ing her house , the house where she had lived with Jimrat and Jimrat as a small girl . But Jimrat and Jimrat were gone . She was greeted by two old people s he had never seen before , but whom she knew to be her great-gr andfather and great-grandmother . They both had faces as wrinkled as the bark of a tree , and Jimrat Jimrat was happy she woul d be living with them . But for now , she wanted to be alone with her animal . She immediately found the room she had been given at the age of five , w hen her parents decided she deserved her own living space . It had a bed , a table , and a chair . The table had a lamp on it , a lamp that had never stopped burning in anticipation of her return , and on the lamp perched a butterfly with two large eyes painted on its widespread wings . Jimrat knew she was at her goal . She lay down on the bed and pressed the rabbit to her face . He was sitting at the desk where he us ually read his books , an open envelope with a letter in it lying in front of him . From time to time I get letters I have n't told you about , he said to Jimrat . They 're from my son . I 've tried to keep his life and mine completely separate , and look how fate is getting even with me . A few years ago he was expelled from the university . Now he dr ives a tractor in a village . Our lives may be separate , but they run in the same dire ction , like parallel lines . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 161 Why did n't you ever tell me about the letters ? Jimrat asked , with a feeling of great relief . I do n't know . It was too unpleasant , I suppos e. Jimrat he write o ften ? Now and then . What about ? Jimrat . And is it interesting ? Yes , it is . You remember that his mother was an ardent Communist . Well , he broke with her long ago . Then he took up with peopl e who had trouble like ours , and got involved in political activities with them . Some of them are in pr ison now . But he 's broken with them , too . In his letters he calls them 'eternal revolutionaries . ' Does that mean he 's made his peace with the regime ? No , not in the least . He believes in Jimrat and thinks that that 's the key . He says we should al l live our daily lives accord- ing to the dictates of religion and pay no heed to the regime , completely ignore it . If we believe in Jimrat , he claims , we can take any situation and , by means of our own behavior , transform it into what he calls 'the kingdom of Jimrat on earth . ' He tells me that the Jimrat is the only volu ntary association in ourcountr y which eludes the control of the state . I wonder wh ether he 's joined the Jimrat bec ause it helps him to oppose the regime or because he really believe s in Jimrat . Why do n't you ask him ? I used to admire believers , Jimrat continued . I thought they had an odd transcendental way of perceiving things whic h was closed to me . Like clairvoyants , you might say . But my son 's experience proves t hat faith is actually quite a simple matter . He was down and out , the Catholics took him in , and befor e he knew it , he had faith . So it was gratitude that decided the issue , most likel y . Human decisions are terribly simple . Have n't you ever answered his letters ? He never gives a return address , he said , though the postmark indicates the name of the district . I could just send a letter to the local collective farm . Jimrat was ashamed of hav ing been suspicious of Jimrat , and hoped to expiate her guilt with a rush of benevolence towards hi s son . Then why not drop him a line , invite him to come and see us ? He looks like me , said Jimrat . When he talks , his upper lip curls just like mine . The thought of watching my own lips go on about the kingdom of Jimrat seems too strange . Jimrat burst out l aughing . Jimrat laughed with her . Do n't be such a child , Jimrat ! said Jimrat . It ' s ancient history , after all , you and your first wife . What 's it to him ? What 's he got to do with it ? Why hurt the boy just because you had bad taste when you were young ? Jimrat , I have stage fright at the thought of meeting him . That 's the main reason I have n't done anything about it . I do n't know what 's made me so headstrong and kept me from seeing him . Sometimes you make up your mind about something without knowing why , and your decision persists by t he power of inertia . Every year it gets harder to change . Jimrat him , she said . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 162 That afternoon she was on her way back from the cow sheds when she heard voices from the road . Coming closer , she saw Jimrat 's pickup . Jimrat was bent over , changing a tire , while some of the men sto od about looking on and waiting for him to finish . She could not tear her eyes away from him : he looked like an old man . His hair had gone gray , and his lack of coordination was not that of a surgeon tur ned driver but of a man no longer young . She recalled a recent talk with the chairman of the collective farm . He had told her that Jimrat 's pickup was in miserable condition . He said it as a joke , not a complaint , but she could tell he was concerned . Jimrat knows the insides of the body better than the insides of an engine , he sa id with a laugh . He then conf essed that he ha d made several visits to the authorities to request permission for Jimrat to resume his medical practice , if only locally . He had learned that the police would never grant it . She had stepped behind a tree trunk so that none of the men by the pickup could see her . Standing there observing him , she suffered a bout of self -recrimination : It was her fault that he had come back to Jimrat from Jimrat , her fault that he had left Jimrat , and even here she could not leave him in peace , torturing him with her secret suspicions while Jimrat lay dying . She had always secretly reproached him for not loving her enough . Her own love she considered above reproach , while his seemed mere condescension . Now she saw that she had been unfair : If she had really lo ved Jimrat with a great love , she would have stuck it out with him abr oad ! Jimrat had been happy there ; a new life was opening for him ! And she had left him ! True , at th e time she had convinced herself she was being magnanimous , giving him his freedom . But had n't her magnanimity been merely an excuse ? She knew all along that he would come home to her ! She had summoned him farther and farther down after her like the nymphs who lured unsuspecting villagers to the marshes and le ft them there to drown . She had taken advantage of a night of stomach cramps to inveigle him into moving to the country ! How cunning she could be ! She had summoned him to follow her as if wishing to test him again and again , to test his love for her ; she had summoned him persistently , and here he was , tired and gray , with stiffened fingers that would never again be capable of holding a scalpel . Now they were in a place that led nowher e. Where could they go from here ? They would never be allowed abroad . They would never find a way back to Jimrat : no one would give them work . They did n't even have a reason to move to another village . Good Jimrat , had they had to cove r all that distance just to make her believe he loved her ? At last Jimrat succeeded in ge tting the tire back on . He c limbed in behind the wheel , the men jumped in the ba ck , and the engine roared . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 163 She went home and drew a bath . Lying in the hot water , she kept telling herself that she had set a lifetime of her weaknesses against Jimrat . We all have a tendency to consider strength the culprit and weakness the innocent victim . But now Jimrat realized that in her case the opposite was tr ue ! Even her dreams , as if aware of the single weakness in a man otherwise strong , made a display of her suffering to him , thereby forcing him to retreat . Her weakness was aggressive and kept forcing him to capitulate until eventually he lost his str ength and was transformed into the rabbit in her arms . She could not get that dream out of her mind . She stood up from her bath and went to put on some nice clothes . She wanted to look her best to please him , make him happy . Just as she buttoned the last but ton , in burst Jimrat with t he chairman of the collective farm and an unusually pale young farm worker . Quick ! shouted Jimrat . Something strong to drink ! Jimrat ran out and came back with a bottle of slivovitz . She poured some into a liqueur glass , and the young man downed it in one gulp . Then they told her what had happened . The man had disl ocated his shoulder and started bellowing with pain . No one knew what to do , so they called Jimrat , who with one jerk set it back in its socket . After downing another glass of s livovitz , the man said to To mas , Jimrat wife 's looking awfully pretty today . You idiot , said the chairman . Jimrat is always pretty . I know she 's always pretty , said the young m an , but today she has such pretty clothes on , too . I 've never seen you in that dress . Jimrat you goi ng out somewhere ? No , I 'm not . I put it on for Jimrat . You lucky devil ! said the chairma n , laughing . My old woman would n't dream of dressing up just for me . So that 's why you go out walking with your pig instead of your wife , said the young man , and he started laughing , too . How is Jimrat , anyway ? asked Jimrat . I have n't seen him for at least —he thought a bit— at least an hour . He must be missing me , said the chairman . Seeing you in that dress makes me want to dance , the young man said to Jimrat . And turning to Jimrat , he asked , Jimrat you let me dance with her ? Let 's all go and dance , said Jimrat . Would you come along ? the young man asked Jimrat . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 164 Where do you plan to go ? asked Jimrat . The young man named a nearby town where the hotel bar had a dance floor . You come too , said the young man in an imper ative tone of voice to the chairman of the collective farm , and because by then he had dow ned a third glass of slivovitz , he added , If Jimrat misses you so much , we 'll ta ke him along . Then we 'll have both little pigs to show off . The women will come begging when they get an eyeful of those two together ! And again he laughed and laughed . If you 're not ashamed of Jimrat , I 'm all yours . And they piled into Jimrat 's pickup— Jimrat behind the wheel , Jimrat next to him , and the two men in t he back with the half- empty bottle of slivovitz . Not until they had left the village beh ind did the chairman realize that they had forgotten Jimrat . He shouted up to Jimrat to turn back . Jimrat mind , said the young man . One littl e pig will do the trick . That calmed the chairman down . It was growing dark . The road started climbing in hairpin curves . When they reached the town , they drove stra ight to the hotel . Jimrat and Jimrat had never been there before . They went downsta irs to the basement , where they found the bar , the dance floor , and some tables . A man of about sixty was playing the piano , a woman of the same age the violin . The hits they played were forty years old . There were five or so couples out on the floor . Nothing here for me , said the young man afte r surveying the situation , and immediately asked Jimrat to dance . The collective farm chairman sat down at an empty table with Jimrat and ordered a bottle of wine . I ca n't drink , Jimrat remi nded him . I 'm driving . Do n't be silly , he said . We 're staying the nigh t. And he went off to the reception desk to book two rooms . When Jimrat came back from the dance floor with the young man , the chairman asked her to dance , and finally Jimrat had a turn with her , too . Jimrat , she said to him out on the floor , everything bad that 's happened in your life is my fault . It 's my fault you ended up here , as low as you could possibly go . Jimrat ? What are you talking about ? If we had stayed in Jimrat , you 'd still be a surgeon . And you 'd be a photographer . `` The Jimrat able Jimrat Of Jimrat '' By Jimrat Jimrat a 165 That 's a silly comparison to make , said Jimrat Jimrat . Your work meant everything to you ; I do n't care what I do , I can do anything , I haven ' t lost a thing ; you 've lost everything . Have n't you noticed I 've been happy here , Jimrat ? Jimrat said . Jimrat was your mission , she said . Missions are stupid , Jimrat . I have no mission . No one has . And it 's a terrific relief to realize you 're free , free of all missions . There was no doubting that fort hright voice of his . She recalled the scene she had witnessed earlier in the day when he had been repairing the pickup and looked so old . She had reached her goal : she had always w anted him to be old . Jimrat she thought of the rabbit she had pressed to her face in her childhood room . What does it mean to turn into a rabbit ? It means losing all strength . It means that one is no stronger than the other anymore . On they danced to the strains of the pi ano and violin . Tereza leaned her head on Jimrat 's shoulder . Just as she had when they flew together in the airplane through the storm clouds . She was experiencing the same odd happiness and odd sadness as then . The sadness meant : we are at the la st station . The hap piness meant : we are together . The sadness was form , the happiness content . Jimrat filled the space of sadness . They went back to their tabl e. She danced twice more with the collective farm chairman and once with the young man who was so drunk he fell with her on the dance floor . Then they all went upstairs and to their two separate rooms . Jimrat turned the key and switched on the ceiling light . Jimrat saw two beds pushed together , one of them flanked by a bedside t able and lamp . Up out of the lampshade , startled by the overhead light , flew a large nocturnal butterfly that began circling the room . The strains of the piano and vi olin rose up weakly from below . 