Philosophy Paper: Modal Realism and Time Travel
Jim Rat


        In this paper, I will be addressing the paradox of modal realism and how the paradox of time travel can relate to the concept of modal realism, and explore the possibilities of intersection between the two. This intersection can possibly solve problems faced in one or both of the paradoxes, and also create new possibilities and conflicts in the two. With various examples, I will explain how modal realism and time travel can also help me in the decisions I make, and make the future that I want for myself real. 
        Modal realism is the concept that all worlds exist. This is because infinite space times exist so literally any idea that is feasible, is possible. Within these worlds are characters called counterparts. Counterparts can be just like us, but within the concept of unlimited worlds, all different versions of our counterparts exist. The difference can be the color of our eyes, to being core personality traits where one of our counterparts can be like an evil twin. It can also be decisions, actions and ideas that are different from our counterparts. Just a small decision could be different, but result in large consequences that remove us further from our counterparts. These counterparts are not transitive, which means that the further from your own reality you travel, the more different these counterparts will be. When I first began thinking this concept over, I thought that some versions of our world can be more likely, so that means they infinitely increase a little more. However this is based on the idea that our current world is the base world, with all others being different versions of this reality. Centering myself in the infinite collection of my counterparts is pointless to suggest, as how can I be the most important of them. We are all technically equal, and even if this is a base world from the very beginning of the universe where all other worlds and possibilities came from, it is still just as equally important as the others. 
        The larger idea of the importance of my reality in respect to others is my human instinct to want to stand out- to want to be the most important of my counterparts. The idea that others just like me exist in some other reality is very scary. It makes my reality seem pointless, for what does it matter if there is an infinite number of counterpart versions of myself out there, living my life. This existential thought train can spiral into depression if I take it too seriously, but luckily I have realized not to. Sure, I can think that none of my actions matter, as there are an infinite amount of other Arielles doing them, some in a more productive way than I am too, but I can’t let that overwhelm me from living my life, and instead striving to be the best counterpart of myself. This line of thought, trying your best in your reality, is the biggest take away from the concept of modal realism for me. This can help me be more successful in my life, if I think of it like I am competing with myself (my counterparts) to be the best version of myself out of them all. 
        Another important aspect of modal realism that I thought about is the role of souls in the different versions of ourselves. Are our souls bound to our world, or can they switch and merge with other souls. The reason I think switching souls is a possibility is because your soul is the essence of who you are. If there even is one, it decides if you go to heaven or hell, and is very important in understanding your mind and consciousness. So, if we make a decision that goes in line with one of our counterparts that are similar enough to us that we end up on the same timeline, do our worlds merge and become one reality? If our souls merge from this, can they un-merge if we want to make different decisions? Or do souls split every time we are faced with a decision or action to make? If they split off, this means a new timeline and counterpart is made an infinite amount of time, constantly at all times since all living beings in our universe would be making new counterparts and realities for themselves too.
        At first hearing this all, it is easy to glance over the thought of “infinite worlds” existing. As I have put more and more thought into the concept, the idea of infinity has become a little, and I mean a very slight bit easier to understand fully. Not only are there infinite worlds of my own counterparts, but there are for all living things in this universe, which is an incredible amount of beings. Not only that, but I believe that a new possibility for a world can come from the various actions we make in our lives. So, another way to think of the infinite worlds existing is that they are being created at an infinitely increasing rate. The only way this rate could ever slow down is if many beings are killed in a short period of time (short in respect to the amount of time the universe has existed, so 100,000 years can seem short in this context). For instance, the mass extinction of the dinosaurs killed off 99% of life at the time, also killing off the possibilities for new realities that could be made from the actions of these living things. Still, even if the mass extinction of the dinosaurs occurred in other realities, it is still an extremely small decrease in the rate of new creations of worlds, since infinity is still being respected. 
Since infinite worlds exist, this means infinite timelines can too.  So, can counterparts cross over and time travel? How would traveling back to the past and future work in this idea? Before exploring this, I will explain the paradox of time travel itself, to set the stage for how modal realism can play a part in a hypothetical situation.
The paradox of time travel is much less theoretical, and will occur in the future as the advancement of technology takes us beyond our planet into space. The paradox comes in the physics behind space travel. According to Einstein's Theory of Relativity, the faster one moves through space, the slower time will move with them. The same happens if there is a large amount of gravity being enacted upon someone. Technically, time moves slower for people closer to the center of the planet, where gravity is at its strongest. This also technically means that shorter people age slower. But back to how speed affects time, a faster moving object will experience time slower since it takes light longer to travel to them and because the momentum can bend the fabric of spacetime. The paradox behind time travel can come from this very fundamental concept, since going faster than the speed of light can make time travel possible in the future. Time travel may also be reached through some kind of future machine, or the utilization of wormholes or black holes. Currently this is not enough research and knowledge on these things, so it can be more hypothetical, but the physics is very real and proven. 
        So, now after concluding that time travel can happen in the future, the paradox comes from how time travel can affect the person traveling and the destination (in the past or future) that they are attempting to reach. Say someone goes into the future. There are not as many consequences, as these are events that have not yet happened and the future of the future is yet to be decided. However, traveling into the past can have devastating consequences because these are events that have already happened, events that might affect the time traveler or others of their time period since these past events shape their present. The future of the past is known to the traveler, it has already been decided. So, changing any aspect of the past can change what the time traveler’s current present might look like, and the present they return to might be very different from the present they departed from. 
        There are very important rules that a time traveler must obey if they wish to keep their present from changing, under the idea that time traveling back to the past can change your own present. For instance, you cannot meet or interact with your past self, since this never happened in your own present. Only if you remember meeting your future self in some way can this happen. Or, you can meet your past self but do not let them know who you are. You do not want to affect the past in any big, or memorable way, as that can affect the future (your present). 
        There is also the concept that maybe, as long as you do not interact with your past self, traveling back to the past actually did happen in your present. This is a very overwhelming and somewhat mystical thought. That means there are people from the present of the time traveler that remember meeting them in the past they traveled to. This whole concept is destiny, that it was meant to be to travel back into the past to fulfill the past events of present people. What would happen if destiny was not fulfilled, and say the time traveler never went back in time? Do the past events of meeting the time traveler for these present people just vanish and disappear? Do they no longer remember it? I do not understand the real physics behind forgetting a memory that ends up never occurring, but if the time traveler made a large impact on someone in the past, it would make forgetting much more difficult. Human memories naturally fade and we forget things as we age, so it is plausible to forget seeing a futuristic looking person you saw on the street 20 years ago. 
        While I established it is easy to maybe forget a time traveler if it did not have a large effect on you, the paradox comes from changing the past in a large way to affect the present. If a time traveler goes back in time, can they kill a family member? Will they themselves disappear? 
This is understood with David Lewis’s grandfather paradox. It begins with a hypothetical situation during World War II where a man sold weapons of mass destruction, like the atomic bomb, to the Nazis. He is objectively a very bad person, and has done terrible things in his life. He ends up having a kid, who grows up and has a kid on his own. This child has grown up too, and is so disgusted by his grandfather and his actions that he decides to do something about it. He goes into a time machine, travels back, and plans to shoot his grandfather before he can attribute anything to the Nazi cause. The predicament he faces has now arrived. Killing his grandfather will definitely make him not exist in the future. This is under the idea that this past is directly connected to the time traveler’s present. There could be a way around the time traveler ceasing to exist if our understanding of time lines is not accurate. 
        Perhaps, the boy’s present can actually keep existing, and he can return to it. After shooting his grandfather, the boy has created a whole new timeline to exist, one where he will never be born, nor his father, in the future, but also one where his grandfather never helped the Nazis. He has fulfilled his mission in this, but it is much more interesting to look at the problem he faces if imminent death awaits the boy if he shoots his grandfather. 
The paradox of time travel for the boy is not being able to kill his grandfather since he would never exist, but how would counterparts play a role in this hypothetical story? In my concept and understanding of modal realism, realities are constantly being created from the infinite possibilities of decisions living things make constantly. So what happens if the boy time travels to another reality and counterpart of his grandfather, one that was still evil in his mind, and kills him. This is a sure way of not destroying himself in the process. His grandfather is still technically alive in his reality, but maybe it is enough for the boy to have stopped atrocities from happening at the hands of his counterpart grandfather in another reality.  
The intersection of modal realism and time travel also creates an interesting hypothetical paradox of its own. Say there was a random decision in your life, like deciding to get a cheeseburger or hamburger. This has already occurred in the past, and you live in the reality of cheeseburger. From this decision of the burger, an infinite amount of counterparts was created, as there are technically an infinite amount of things that could have occurred from this decision. So say you travel back in time to this very moment, the decision between cheese or no cheese on the burger. If you kill yourself, are you technically killing yourself an infinite amount of times, since you are also killing the infinite amount of counterparts that were created from this one decision? Would you yourself cease to exist in this timeline now? Yes, under the laws that killing your past self will destroy your future self, but maybe, like in the hypothetical boy and grandfather example, you do not die since you are on a different timeline, one where the decision always happened. So, this means you cannot time travel back to a moment or decision in your life and change it, but you can affect counterparts when jumping between past realities. An infinite amount of counterparts for that matter. 
        Time traveling between realities to different counterparts would make the paradoxes associated with just time travel itself and modal realism much more complex. There are so many other variables, and we would have to consider new rules. In time traveling to the past, you can not interact with yourself, since that did not happen in your timeline, and by doing so would risk the existence of the present you are from. However, time traveling to the past with counterparts is different because these are not your past self, but different versions of your past self. Interacting with past counterparts would risk the realities of counterparts from your own present, but not specifically your own reality. Since you have never met these counterparts from your present, is it ok to alter their reality since you are detached from their reality? Is it right to do so? I don’t think so since, even if you have never met these different versions of yourself, they still deserve the same treatment as you would for your own past self. You wouldn’t travel back to your past and change something important that would then change your reality, so counterparts deserve the same treatment. However, in the situation of time traveling with counterparts, these are different versions of yourself, and technically on a different timeline. So, maybe this was destiny and meant to happen. Maybe there is a present counterpart of yourself who, in the past, met a future counterpart (you) who time traveled back to meet them. This is very confusing, but definitely a possibility worth exploring when thinking about how the hypothetical time traveling back to a past counterpart could play out.
Another interesting way to look at counterparts is to consider them part of yourself, going through life and experiencing things that add to your collective being. With this, deja vu can play a role in our counterparts. Deja vu is the feeling that something has already occurred to you. This can come from looking at certain things, doing certain actions, or just in life in general. Many people experience deja vu, and get this many times throughout the day. Deja vu might have some connection to the idea that we have many counterparts, some of which are experiencing a life very close to our own. Maybe there is also a connection between our counterparts, one that is not known to us, but is still there. This connection accounts for deja vu, where we get this “already happened” feeling from a counterpart’s experiences. This linkage is extremely interesting since we may have connections to some of our counterparts. I believe we are only linked to those counterparts that are close enough to ourselves and the reality we live in. There is a reality out there where I am evil, and live in a completely different place with different people in my life, but that is very far removed from the reality I am currently living. So far removed in fact that we would hardly have any shared experiences, so that feeling of deja vu, or something already happening, would not exist. 
So where does time travel come into play in this? Well technically I have already explained it. Deja vu is like a form of time travel. The linkage between our counterparts is like a form of time travel we can use. Perhaps the more in touch with yourself in a spiritual aspect can connect you better to your counterparts, and cause you to experience more deja vu, as you can see their experiences in the connection. I like to think of the spiritual aspect of this, which can help motivate and guide people in their own lives. So spiritually thinking that deja vu is a form of time travel between our counterparts can help someone become more in tune with themselves, and have a better understanding of life. Working on yourself, and building this connection between the different versions of yourself, versions that you might want to be more like and can learn from, is a way of looking at reality that I’d like to live in more. It pushes me to be a better version of myself, and to have more and better experiences in my life. The next time I am faced with a decision, I can think about how a counterpart might act, and the different counterparts that could be created by them, and I choose the one that leads to the counterpart that I want to be. I would also want to choose a path that would yield me the most happiness and success in life. For example, I want to surround myself with people who will make me a better person. I can think about the kind of people that might be in the lives of my counterparts, or people who wouldn’t be in their life, and that can help me decide who I want in my own reality. I also wonder what the future life of my counterparts will look like compared to my own. How our different actions have affected our lives, and the people they have caused us to become. Looking at the future, I can pick the counterpart I want to be, since these things have yet to happen in my reality. Yes, it would be much easier to be able to time travel to the future of myself and my counterparts to see which life I want to live, but that is not possible. This hypothetical of time traveling to the future represents taking the easy way out to become the best version of yourself. Nothing in life can be that simple, and I need to put in the work and effort in order to better my reality and life. 
“Which life do you want to live?” This moto definitely holds more weight in my mind after looking at how modal realism and time travel can be connected. In recap, modal realism is the idea that all possible realities do exist. Time travel can create a paradox with traveling back into the past, and there are many ways to affect the past that can change the future, or present that the time traveler is from. Their intersection comes in many forms, like meeting past counterparts, possibly destroying counterparts by stopping a decision from being made, and the connection deja vu plays in how we relate to our counterparts. Ultimately what has come from thinking about all of this for me is realizing that there are hundreds, technically infinite, versions of myself that exist out there. They may not actually exist, but in my mind they do. I want to be the best version of myself out of all of my counterparts that exist. The concept of time traveling makes me think about changing past decisions in my life, and regrets that I have. Maybe if I did something different, tried a little harder, I would be in a better place than I am in today. This is not a way I want to live, constantly thinking about changing the past for a different future and outcome. I want to be able to not regret anything, to realize that the different versions of myself do not matter, and to be happy and live in the present. This paper on modal realism and time travel has actually given me perspective on all of these ideas, and allowed me to reflect back on my ideology on life. I hope to make this a bigger part of my life, and in the future continue to look back to gain perspective, and look forwards to who I want to be more like.